n short, the shaman is transformed from a profane into a sacred state of being. Not only has he
effected his own cure through this mystical transmutation, he is now invested with the power of
the sacred, and hence can cure others as well. It is of the first order of importance to remember
this, that the shaman is more than merely a sick man, or a madman; he is a sick man who has
healed himself, who is cured, and who must shamanize in order to remain cured.'
It should be noted that Eliade used the word "profane" deliberately with the intent of creating a
clear split between the notion of the profane world of ordinary experience and the sacred world
which is "Wholly Other."'
THE TECHNIQUES OF ECSTASY
Not all shamans use intoxication with plants to obtain ecstasy, but all shamanic practice aims to
give rise to ecstasy. Drumming, manipulation of breath, ordeals, fasting, theatrical illusions,
sexual abstinence-all are time-honored methods for entering into the trance necessary for
shamanic work. Yet none of these methods is as effective, as ancient, and as overwhelming as
the use of plants containing chemical compounds that produce visions.
This practice of using visionary plant intoxicants may seem alien or surprising to some
Westerners. Our society regards psychoactive drugs as either frivolous or dangerous, at best
reserved for the treatment of the seriously mentally ill where no other effective method is
available. We retain the notion of the healer in the figure of the medical professional who,
through the possession of special knowledge, can cure. But the specialized knowledge of the
modern physician is clinical knowledge, removed from the unfolding drama of each unique and
particular person.
Shamanism is different. Usually, if drugs are used, the shaman, not the patient, will take the
drug. The motivation is also entirely different. The plants used by the shaman are not intended
to stimulate the immune system or the body's other natural defenses against disease. Rather, the
shamanic plants allow the healer to journey into an invisible realm in which the causality of the
ordinary world is replaced with the rationale of natural magic. In this realm, language, ideas,
and meaning have greater power than cause and effect. Sympathies, resonances, intentions, and
personal will are linguistically magnified through poetic rhetoric. The imagination is invoked
and sometimes its forms are beheld visibly. Within the magical mind-set of the shaman, the
ordinary connections of the world and what we call natural laws are deemphasized or ignored.
A WORLD MADE OF LANGUAGE
The evidence gathered from millennia of shamanic experience argues that the world is actually
made of language in some fashion. Although at odds with the expectations of modern science,
this radical proposition is in agreement with much of current linguistic thinking.
"The twentieth-century linguistic revolution," says Boston University anthropologist Misia
Landau, "is the recognition that language is not merely a device for communicating ideas about
the world, but rather a tool for bringing the world into existence in the first place. Reality is not
simply `experienced' or `reflected' in language, but instead is actually produced by language. "4
From the point of view of the psychedelic shaman, the world appears to be more in the nature
of an utterance or a tale than in any way related to the leptons and baryons or charge and spin
that our high priests, the physicists, speak of. For the shaman, the cosmos is a tale that becomes
true as it is told, and as it tells itself. This perspective implies that human imagination can seize
the tiller of being in the world. Freedom, personal responsibility, and a humbling awareness of
the true size and intelligence of the world combine in this point of view to make it a fitting
basis for living an authentic neo-Archaic life. A reverence for and an immersion in the powers
of language and communication are the basis of the shamanic path.
This is why the shaman is the remote ancestor of the poet and artist. Our need to feel part of the
world seems to demand that we express ourselves through creative activity. The ultimate
wellsprings of this creativity are hidden in the mystery of language. Shamanic ecstasy is an act
of surrender that authenticates both the individual self and that which is surrendered to, the
mystery of being. Because our maps of reality are determined by our present circumstances, we
tend to lose awareness of the larger patterns of time and space. Only by gaining access to the
Transcendent Other can those patterns of time and space and our role in them be glimpsed.
Shamanism strives for this higher point of view, which is achieved through a feat of linguistic
prowess. A shaman is one who has attained a vision of the beginnings and the endings of all
things and who can communicate that vision. To the rational thinker, this is inconceivable, yetthe techniques of shamanism are directed toward this end and this is the source of their power.
Preeminent among the shaman's techniques is the use of the plant hallucinogens, repositories of
living vegetable gnosis that lie, now nearly forgotten, in our ancient past.
By entering the domain of plant intelligence, the shaman becomes, in a way, privileged to a
higher dimensional perspective on experience. Common sense assumes that, though languages
Then, more loudly, alerting the other doctors and nurses in the area: “This is Eben
Alexander.
”
Nearby staff who heard her gathered around my stretcher. Holley, who’d been
following the ambulance, joined the crowd while Laura reeled off the obligatory
questions about the most obvious possible causes for someone in my condition. Was Iwithdrawing from alcohol? Had I recently ingested any strong hallucinogenic street
drugs? Then she went to work trying to bring my seizures to a halt.
In recent months, Eben IV had been putting me through a vigorous conditioning
program for a planned father-son climb up Ecuador’s 19,300-foot Mount Cotopaxi,
which he had climbed the previous February. The program had increased my strength
considerably, making it that much more difficult for the orderlies trying to hold me
down. Five minutes and 15 milligrams of intravenous diazepam later, I was still
delirious and still trying to fight everyone off, but to Dr. Potter’s relief I was at least
now fighting with both sides of my body. Holley told Laura about the severe headache
I’d been having before I went into seizure, which prompted Dr. Potter to perform a
lumbar puncture—a procedure in which a small amount of cerebrospinal fluid is
extracted from the base of the spine.
Cerebrospinal fluid is a clear, watery substance that runs along the surface of the
spinal cord and coats the brain, cushioning it from impacts. A normal, healthy human
body produces about a pint of it a day, and any diminishment in the clarity of the fluid
indicates that an infection or hemorrhage has occurred.
Such an infection is called meningitis: the swelling of the meninges, the membranes
that line the inside of the spine and skull and that are in direct contact with the
cerebrospinal fluid. In four cases out of five a virus causes the disease. Viral meningitis
can make a patient quite ill, but it is only fatal in approximately 1 percent of cases. In
one case out of five, however, bacteria cause meningitis. Bacteria, being more primitive
than viruses, can be a more dangerous foe. Cases of bacterial meningitis are uniformly
fatal if untreated. Even when treated rapidly with the appropriate antibiotics, the
mortality rate ranges from 15 to 40 percent.
One of the least likely culprits for bacterial meningitis in adults is a very old and very
tough bacteria named Escherichia coli—better known simply as E. coli. No one knows
how old E. coli is precisely, but estimates hover between three and four billion years.
The organism has no nucleus and reproduces by the primitive but extremely efficient
process known as asexual binary fission (in other words, by splitting in two). Imagine a
cell filled, essentially, with DNA, that can take in nutrients (usually from other cells that
it attacks and absorbs) directly through its cellular wall. Then imagine that it can
simultaneously copy several strands of DNA and split into two daughter cells every
twenty minutes or so. In an hour, you’ll have 8 of them. In twelve hours, 69 billion. By
hour fifteen, you’ll have 35 trillion. This explosive growth only slows when its food
begins to run out.
E. coli are also highly promiscuous. They can trade genes with other bacterial
species through a process called bacterial conjugation, which allows an E. coli cell to
rapidly pick up new traits (such as resistance to a new antibiotic) when needed. This
basic recipe for success has kept E. coli on the planet since the earliest days ofunicellular life. We all have E. coli bacteria residing within us—mostly in our
gastrointestinal tract. Under normal conditions, this poses no threat to us. But when
varieties of E. coli that have picked up DNA strands that make them especially
aggressive invade the cerebrospinal fluid around the spinal cord and brain, the primitive
cells immediately begin devouring the glucose in the fluid, and whatever else is available
to consume, including the brain itself.
No one in the ER, at that point, thought I had E. coli meningitis. They had no reason
to suspect it. The disease is astronomically rare in adults. Newborns are the most
common victims, but cases of babies any older than three months having it are
exceedingly uncommon. Fewer than one in 10 million adults contract it spontaneously
each year.
In cases of bacterial meningitis, the bacteria attack the outer layer of the brain, or
cortex, first. The word cortex derives from a Latin word meaning “rind” or “bark.
” If
you picture an orange, its rind is a pretty good model for the way the cortex surrounds
the more primitive sections of the brain. The cortex is responsible for memory,
language, emotion, visual and auditory awareness, and logic. So when an organism like
E. coli attacks the brain, the initial damage is to the areas that perform the functions
most crucial to maintaining our human qualities. Many victims of bacterial meningitis
die in the first several days of their illness. Of those who arrive in an emergency room
with a rapid downward spiral in neurologic function, as I did, only 10 percent are lucky
enough to survive. However, their luck is limited, as many of them will spend the rest
of their lives in a vegetative state.
Though she didn’t suspect E. coli meningitis, Dr. Potter thought I might have some
kind of brain infection, which is why she decided on the lumbar puncture. Just as she
was telling one of the nurses to bring her a lumbar puncture tray and prepare me for the
procedure, my body surged up as if my gurney had been electrified. With a fresh blast
of energy, I let out a long, agonized groan, arched my back, and flailed my arms at the
air. My face was red, and the veins in my neck bulged out crazily. Laura shouted for
more help, and soon two, then four, and finally six attendants were struggling to hold
me down for the procedure. They forced my body into a fetal position while Laura
administered more sedatives. Finally, they were able to make me still enough for the
needle to penetrate the base of my spine.
When bacteria attack, the body goes immediately into defense mode, sending shock
troops of white blood cells from their barracks in the spleen and bone marrow to fight
off the invaders. They’re the first casualties in the massive cellular war that happens
whenever a foreign biological agent invades the body, and Dr. Potter knew that any
lack of clarity in my cerebrospinal fluid would be caused by my white blood cells.
Dr. Potter bent over and focused on the manometer, the transparent vertical tube
into which the cerebrospinal fluid would emerge. Laura’s first surprise was that thefluid didn’t drip but gushed out—due to dangerously high pressure.
Her second surprise was the fluid’s appearance. The slightest opacity would tell her
I was in deep trouble. What shot out into the manometer was viscous and white, with a
subtle tinge of green.
My spinal fluid was full of pus.3.
Out of Nowhere
Dr. Potter paged Dr. Robert Brennan, one of her associates at Lynchburg General and
a specialist in infectious disease. While they waited for more test results to come from
the adjacent labs, they considered all of the diagnostic possibilities and therapeutic
options.
Minute by minute, as the test results came back, I continued to groan and squirm
beneath the straps on my gurney. An ever more baffling picture was emerging. The
Gram’s stain (a chemical test, named after a Danish physician who invented the
method, that allows doctors to classify an invading bacteria as either gram-negative or
gram-positive) came back indicating gram-negative rods—which was highly unusual.
Meanwhile a computerized tomography (CT) scan of my head showed that the
meningeal lining of my brain was dangerously swollen and inflamed. A breathing tube
was put into my trachea, allowing a ventilator to take over the job of breathing for me
—twelve breaths a minute, exactly—and a battery of monitors was set up around my
bed to record every movement within my  want to be doing som ething!” They don’t realize that they are doing
their m ission, just by being here.There are m any cases of first-tim ers in m y other books. An entire
section in Convoluted Universe, Book Three is devoted to those who
unearthed m em ories of com ing directly from the God Source. In this
book are som e portions of recent (2009-2010) sessions that illustrate
just how com plex this decision process was that brought them here to
Earth.
MARIE
IN MY HYPNOSIS TECHNIQUE I use a m ethod of having the
client drift down from a cloud into an appropriate past life. I have found
it to be 98% effective, so I use it often. When Marie was in deep trance
she didn’t want to com e down off the cloud. Instead she wanted to go
up. When that happens I allow the client to do whatever they wish. I
never know where it will lead. As she m oved upward she found herself
in black space surrounded by m any stars.
“I see how little I am , and
how big it is out there.
” She seem ed to be hovering, suspended in m id-
air.
“It’s all around m e and I feel like I’m a part of it all. I’d like to get
closer to the stars. Just get closer to the closest star I can, and see if I
can look inside of it.
”
D: Which direction do you want to go?
M: The star cam e to m e. I didn’t have to go to it. It’s right there. I’m
looking through it and I’m seeing inside of it, I guess. It’s like
gases. It’s like vapors. Nothing is staying still. All vapor, gas and
colors. Like iridescent water, like an oil slick on water. I’m not in
the black of the sky anym ore. I’m in colors. It’s just flashing lights.
D: So the star is not at all like you thought it would look like.
M: No, I thought it would be like the big stars going to m ake m e blind,
but it’s not.but it s not.
D: Do you want to see if it has a surface?
M: It feels right just the way it is because it’s encircling m e,
encom passing m e. Just floating through the gases. And m y head is
m oving all around so I can see behind m e and around. T o see if I
can see its outside... but I’m just seeing its inside.
D: So it doesn
’t have to have a solid surface?
M: No. I feel perfect in it. I’m one with it. (Laugh) I don’t feel alien to
it. It accepts m e as part of it. No rejection. I am part of that star,
and it hasn’t been disrupted because of m y appearance. It’s still
going on and I’m just part of it. No structure. No form .
D: Do you feel you have a body, or what does it feel like?
M: Encom passed. I feel like it’s whispering all around m y body . V ery
pleasant, very content, very cushioned... part of the vapors.
Suspended. I feel suspended, so do you feel you have a body
when you’re suspended? Y ou just feel like you’re hanging. It’s all
around m e.
D: Do you feel alone?
M: I’m all alone. Well, I don’t feel like I’m alone because I’m with it. I
don’t feel alone.
D: I meant, there are no others.
M: No, nobody besides m e. No people at all. Not even the thought of
people. I’m in the cosm os. I feel one with it. Not separate from it.
If I try to float out and see it I m ight feel separate of it. I don’t
know.
D: Do you have any desire to do anything else?
I was trying to get her to m ove on with the story.M: No, I don’t need to do anything but be right there. (Laugh) I don’t
want to go anywhere else. (Laugh)
This could have gone on for quite a while, so I m oved her forward
to a tim e when she decided to leave that place and go som ewhere else
that was appropriate. When I did she was no longer in space. She saw
herself on a very high cliff. There was an overhang, a piece that jutted
out over a huge chasm .
M: I can see down there. It’s like I can see lots of little ants. (Laugh) It
m ight be people. But they’re so tiny . I see little dots that could be
trees. They could be cars. They could be people. They’re m oving
so it’s like I’m seeing som ething from far away . I think I m ight be
on top of a m ountain... yes. It’s not scary . I’m above everybody .
They probably are people. The first thing I thought of was ants...
little ants. It’s distant.
D: Become aware of your body. What does your body feel like?
M: I don’t feel like I’m in a body.
D: Do you want to stay there or do you want to go out?
M: I need to just be there a little longer instead of com ing down the
m ountain. (Laugh) I feel like I’m kind of in the heavens, like the
ground is just one little thin layer and then I’m above everything
else. So it’s like everything else is around m e. But I feel I’m m ore
in the sky than the rock I’m on. I feel I could just fly off of there if
I wanted to.
D: No restrictions. No responsibilities. Total freedom. (Yes)
I decided to m ove her again, so I had her leave that place and go
som ewhere else that was appropriate. This tim e we were in for anothersurprise. She was still not in a physical body.
M: It’s like bare rock. There’s no grass. There are no flowers. It’s just
sheer rock. I’m in the granite. There are colors in the rock.
There’s gray and black, but I don’t see any other colors. I’m
surprised.
D: What does that feel like to be part of a rock?
M: That sam e feeling of being encom passed like it’s all around m e. Y et
I’m free. I can get up and go anytim e.
D: It sounds like you can be a part of anything.
M: Y es. I don’t feel rejected. It’s accepting m e, supporting or cradling
m e. I’m just part of it.
D: It sounds like you can just choose any form you want to be and
experience it. (Yes) That’
s interesting. Do you feel you learn
anything when you become these different objects?
M: I feel just part of one, and that’s a com fort to m e that I am just
accepted and loved and part of it. No digression between the two.
No separation. Not a separateness, but a distinctive difference in
the feeling of being encom passed. When I am part of som ething, I
learn to feel one with it instead of separate.
D: Do you think you
’
re going to be in a physical body some day?
M: Not unless you tell m e to. (Laugh.) It feels lim iting to be in a body .
(Laugh.) I feel surrounded and it feels like to put a body on it
would ground it and s