eater attraction. They return to the house of Cephalus, Polemarchus’
father, now in extreme old age, who is found sitting upon a cushioned seat
crowned for a sacrifice. ’You should come to me oftener, Socrates, for I am too
old to go to you; and at my time of life, having lost other pleasures, I care the
more for conversation.’ Socrates asks him what he thinks of age, to which the
old man replies, that the sorrows and discontents of age are to be attributed to
the tempers of men, and that age is a time of peace in which the tyranny of the
passions is no longer felt. Yes, replies Socrates, but the world will say, Cephalus,
that you are happy in old age because you are rich. ’And there is something in
what they say, Socrates, but not so much as they imagine–as Themistocles re-
plied to the Seriphian, "Neither you, if you had been an Athenian, nor I, if I
had been a Seriphian, would ever have been famous,"I might in like manner
reply to you, Neither a good poor man can be happy in age, nor yet a bad rich
man.’ Socrates remarks that Cephalus appears not to care about riches, a qua-
lity which he ascribes to his having inherited, not acquired them, and would
like to know what he considers to be the chief advantage of them. Cephalus
answers that when you are old the belief in the world below grows upon you,
and then to have done justice and never to have been compelled to do injustice
through poverty, and never to have deceived anyone, are felt to be unspeaka-
ble blessings. Socrates, who is evidently preparing for an argument, next asks,
What is the meaning of the word justice? To tell the truth and pay your debts?
No more than this? Or must we admit exceptions? Ought I, for example, to put
back into the hands of my friend, who has gone mad, the sword which I bor-
rowed of him when he was in his right mind? ’There must be exceptions.’ ’And
yet,’ says Polemarchus, ’the definition which has been given has the authority
of Simonides.’ Here Cephalus retires to look after the sacrifices, and beque-
aths, as Socrates facetiously remarks, the possession of the argument to his heir,
Polemarchus...
The description of old age is finished, and Plato, as his manner is, has touched
the key-note of the whole work in asking for the definition of justice, first sug-
gesting the question which Glaucon afterwards pursues respecting external go-
ods, and preparing for the concluding mythus of the world below in the slight
allusion of Cephalus. The portrait of the just man is a natural frontispiece or
introduction to the long discourse which follows, and may perhaps imply that
in all our perplexity about the nature of justice, there is no difficulty in discer-
ning ’who is a just man.’ The first explanation has been supported by a saying
of Simonides; and now Socrates has a mind to show that the resolution of jus-
tice into two unconnected precepts, which have no common principle, fails to
satisfy the demands of dialectic.
...He proceeds: What did Simonides mean by this saying of his? Did he mean
that I was to give back arms to a madman? ’No, not in that case, not if the par-
http://www.idph.net18 IDPH
ties are friends, and evil would result. He meant that you were to do what was
proper, good to friends and harm to enemies.’ Every act does something to so-
mebody; and following this analogy, Socrates asks, What is this due and proper
thing which justice does, and to whom? He is answered that justice does good
to friends and harm to enemies. But in what way good or harm? ’In making
alliances with the one, and going to war with the other.’ Then in time of peace
what is the good of justice? The answer is that justice is of use in contracts, and
contracts are money partnerships. Yes; but how in such partnerships is the just
man of more use than any other man? ’When you want to have money safely
kept and not used.’ Then justice will be useful when money is useless. And
there is another difficulty: justice, like the art of war or any other art, must be of
opposites, good at attack as well as at defence, at stealing as well as at guarding.
But then justice is a thief, though a hero notwithstanding, like Autolycus, the
Homeric hero, who was ’excellent above all men in theft and perjury’–to such
a pass have you and Homer and Simonides brought us; though I do not forget
that the thieving must be for the good of friends and the harm of enemies. And
still there arises another question: Are friends to be interpreted as real or see-
ming; enemies as real or seeming? And are our friends to be only the good, and
our enemies to be the evil? The answer is, that we must do good to our seeming
and real good friends, and evil to our seeming and real evil enemies–good to
the good, evil to the evil. But ought we to render evil for evil at all, when to
do so will only make men more evil? Can justice produce injustice any more
than the art of horsemanship can make bad horsemen, or heat produce cold?
The final conclusion is, that no sage or poet ever said that the just return evil for
evil; this was a maxim of some rich and mighty man, Periander, Perdiccas, or
Ismenias the Theban (about B.C. 398-381)...
Thus the first stage of aphoristic or unconscious morality is shown to be inade-
quate to the wants of the age; the authority of the poets is set aside, and through
the winding mazes of dialectic we make an approach to the Christian precept of
forgiveness of injuries. Similar words are applied by the Persian mystic poet to
the Divine being when the questioning spirit is stirred within him:–’If because
I do evil, Thou punishest me by evil, what is the difference between Thee and
me?’ In this both Plato and Kheyam rise above the level of many Christian (?)
theologians. The first definition of justice easily passes into the second; for the
simple words ’to speak the truth and pay your debts’ is substituted the more
abstract ’to do good to your friends and harm to your enemies.’ Either of the-
se explanations gives a sufficient rule of life for plain men, but they both fall
short of the precision of philosophy. We may note in passing the antiquity of
casuistry, which not only arises out of the conflict of established principles in
particular cases, but also out of the effort to attain them, and is prior as well as
posterior to our fundamental notions of morality. The ’interrogation’ of moral
ideas; the appeal to the authority of Homer; the conclusion that the maxim, ’Do
good to your friends and harm to your enemies,’ being erroneous, could not
http://www.idph.netIDPH 19
have been the word of any great man, are all of them very characteristic of the
Platonic Socrates.
...Here Thrasymachus, who has made several attempts to interrupt, but has
hitherto been kept in order by the company, takes advantage of a pause and
rushes into the arena, beginning, like a savage animal, with a roar. ’Socrates,’
he says, ’what folly is this?–Why do you agree to be vanquished by one another
in a pretended argument?’ He then prohibits all the ordinary definitions of jus-
tice; to which Socrates replies that he cannot tell how many twelve is, if he is
forbidden to say 2 x 6, or 3 x 4, or 6 x 2, or 4 x 3. At first Thrasymachus is
reluctant to argue; but at length, with a promise of payment on the part of the
company and of praise from Socrates, he is induced to open the game. ’Listen,’
he says, ’my answer is that might is right, justice the interest of the stronger:
now praise me.’ Let me understand you first. Do you mean that because Poly-
damas the wrestler, who is stronger than we are, finds the eating of beef for his
interest, the eating of beef is also for our interest, who are not so strong? Th-
rasymachus is indignant at the illustration, and in pompous words, apparently
intended to restore dignity to the argument, he explains his meaning to be that
the rulers make laws for their own interests. But suppose, says Socrates, that
the ruler or stronger makes a mistake–then the interest of the stronger is not his
interest. Thrasymachus is saved from this speedy downfall by his disciple Clei-
tophon, who introduces the word ’thinks;’–not the actual interest of the ruler,
but what he thinks or what seems to be his interest, is justice. The contradiction
is escaped by the unmeaning evasion: for though his real and apparent interests
may differ, what the ruler thinks to be his interest will always remain what he
thinks to be his interest.
Of course this was not the original assertion, nor is the new interpretation ac-
cepted by Thrasymachus himself. But Socrates is not disposed to quarrel about
words, if, as he significantly insinuates, his adversary has changed his mind. In
what follows Thrasymachus does in fact withdraw his admission that the ruler
may make a mistake, for he affirms that the ruler as a ruler is infallible. Socrates
is quite ready to accept the new position, which he equally turns against Th-
rasymachus by the help of the analogy of the arts. Every art or science has an
interest, but this interest is to be distinguished from the accidental interest of
the artist, and is only concerned with the good of the things or persons which
come under the art. And justice has an interest which is the interest not of the
ruler or judge, but of those who come under his sway.
Thrasymachus is on the brink of the inevitable conclusion, when he makes a
bold diversion. ’Tell me, Socrates,’ he says, ’have you a nurse?’ What a ques-
tion! Why do you ask? ’Because, if you have, she neglects you and lets you
go about drivelling, and has not even taught you to know the shepherd from
the sheep. For you fancy that shepherds and rulers never think of their own
interest, but only of their sheep or subjects, whereas the truth is that they fat-
http://www.idph.net20 IDPH
ten them for their use, sheep and subjects alike. And experience proves that in
every relation of life the just man is the loser and the unjust the gainer, especi-
ally where injustice is on the grand scale, which is quite another thing from the
petty rogueries of swindlers and burglars and robbers of temples. The langua-
ge of men proves this–our ’gracious’ and ’blessed’ tyrant and the like–all which
tends to show (1) that justice is the interest of the stronger; and (2) that injustice
is more profitable and also stronger than justice.’
Thrasymachus, who is better at a speech than at a close argument, having de-
luged the company with words, has a mind to escape. But the others will not
let him go, and Socrates adds a humble but earnest request that he will not de-
sert them at such a crisis of their fate. ’And what can I do more for you?’ he
says; ’would you have me put the words bodily into your souls?’ God forbid!
replies Socrates; but we want you to be consistent in the use of terms, and not
to employ ’physician’ in an exact sense, and then again ’shepherd’ or ’ruler’ in
an inexact,–if the words are strictly taken, the ruler and the shepherd look only
to the good of their people or flocks and not to their own: whereas you insist
that rulers are solely actuated by love of office. ’No doubt about it,’ replies Th-
rasymachus. Then why are they paid? Is not the reason, that their interest is not
comprehended in their art, and is therefore the concern of another art, the art
of pay, which is common to the arts in general, and therefore not identical with
any one of them? Nor would any man be a ruler unless he were induced by
the hope of reward or the fear of punishment;–the reward is money or honour,
the punishment is the necessity of being ruled by a man worse than himself.
And if a State (or Church) were composed entirely of good men, they would be
affected by the last motive only; and there would be as much ’nolo episcopari’
as there is at present of the opposite...
The satire on existing governments is heightened by the simple and apparently
incidental manner in which the last remark is introduced. There is a similar
irony in the argument that the governors of mankind do not like being in office,
and that therefore they demand pay.
...Enough of this: the other assertion of Thrasymachus is far more important–
that the unjust life is more gainful than the just. Now, as you and I, Glaucon,
are not convinced by him, we must reply to him; but if we try to compare their
respective gains we shall want a judge to decide for us; we had better therefore
proceed by making mutual admissions of the truth to one another.
Thrasymachus had asserted that perfect injustice was more gainful than perfect
justice, and after a little hesitation he is induced by Socrates to admit the still
greater paradox that injustice is virtue and justice vice. Socrates praises his
frankness, and assumes the attitude of one whose only wish is to understand
the meaning of his opponents. At the same time he is weaving a net in which
Thrasymachus is finally enclosed. The admission is elicited from him that the
http://www.idph.netIDPH 21
just man seeks to gain an advantage over the unjust only, but not over the just,
while the unjust would gain an advantage over either. Socrates, in order to
test this statement, employs once more the favourite analogy of the arts. The
musician, doctor, skilled artist of any sort, does not seek to gain more than the
skilled, but only more than the unskilled (that is to say, he works up to a rule,
standard, law, and does not exceed it), whereas the unskilled makes random
efforts at excess. Thus the skilled falls on the side of the good, and the unskilled
on the side of the evil, and the just is the skilled, and the unjust is the unskilled.
There was great difficulty in bringing Thrasymachus to the point; the day was
hot and he was streaming with perspiration, and for the first time in his life he
was seen to blush. But his other thesis that injustice was stronger than justice
has not yet been refuted, and Socrates now proceeds to the consideration of
this, which, with the assistance of Thrasymachus, he hopes to clear up; the
latter is at first churlish, but in the judicious hands of Socrates is soon restored
to good-humour: Is there not honour among thieves? Is not the strength of
injustice only a remnant of justice? Is not absolute injustice absolute weakness
also? A house that is divided against itself cannot stand; two men who quarrel
detract from one another’s strength, and he who is at war with himself is the
enemy of himself and the gods. Not wickedness therefore, but semi-wickedness
flourishes in states, –a remnant of good is needed in order to make union in
action possible,– there is no kingdom of evil in this world.
Another question has not been answered: Is the just or the unjust the happier?
To this we reply, that every art has an end and an excellence or virtue by which
the end is accomplished. And is not the end of the soul happiness, and justice
the excellence of the soul by which happiness is attained? Justice and happiness
being thus shown to be inseparable, the question whether the just or the unjust
is the happier has disappeared.
Thrasymachus replies: ’Let this be your entertainment, Socrates, at the festi-
val of Bendis.’ Yes; and a very good entertainment with which your kindness
has supplied me, now that you have left off scolding. And yet not a good
entertainment–but that was my own fault, for I tasted of too many things. First
of all the nature of justice was the subject of our enquiry, and then whether justi-
ce is virtue and wisdom, or evil and folly; and then the comparative advantages
of just and unjust: and the sum of all is that I know not what justice is; how then
shall I know whether the just is happy or not?...
Thus the sophistical fabric has been demolished, chiefly by appealing to the
analogy of the arts. ’Justice is like the arts (1) in having no external interest, and
(2) in not aiming at excess, and (3) justice is to happiness what the implement
of the workman is to his work.’ At this the modern reader is apt to stumble,
because he forgets that Plato is writing in an age when the arts and the virtu-
es, like the moral and intellectual faculties, were still undistinguished. Among
http://www.idph.net22 IDPH
early enquirers into the nature of human action the arts helped to fill up the
void of speculation; and at first the comparison of the arts and the virtues was
not perceived by them to be fallacious. They only saw the points of agreement
in them and not the points of difference. Virtue, like art, must take means to an
end; good manners are both an art and a virtue; character is naturally described
under the image of a statue; and there are many other figures of speech which
are readily transferred from art to morals. The next generation cleared up these
perplexities; or at least supplied after ages with a further analysis of them. The
contemporaries of Plato were in a state of transition, and had not yet fully rea-
lized the common-sense distinction of Aristotle, that ’virtue is concerned with
action, art with production’ (Nic. Eth.), or that ’virtue implies intention and
constancy of purpose,’ whereas ’art requires knowledge only’. And yet in the
absurdities which follow from some uses of the analogy, there seems to be an
intimation conveyed that virtue is more than art. This is implied in the reductio
ad absurdum that ’justice is a thief,’ and in the dissatisfaction which Socrates
expresses at the final result.
The expression ’an art of pay’ which is described as ’common to all the arts’
is not in accordance with the ordinary use of language. Nor is it employed
elsewhere either by Plato or by any other Greek writer. It is suggested by the
argument, and seems to extend the conception of art to doing as well as making.
Another flaw or inaccuracy of language may be noted in the words ’men who
are injured are made more unjust.’ For those who are injured are not necessarily
made worse, but only harmed or ill- treated.
The second of the three arguments, ’that the just does not aim at excess,’ has a
real meaning, though wrapped up in an enigmatical form. That the good is of
the nature of the finite is a peculiarly Hellenic sentiment, which may be compa-
red with the language of those modern writers who speak of virtue as fitness,
and of freedom as obedience to law. The mathematical or logical notion of limit
easily passes into an ethical one, and even finds a mythological expression in
the conception of envy (Greek). Ideas of measure, equality, order, unity, propor-
tion, still linger in the writings of moralists; and the true spirit of the fine arts is
better conveyed by such terms than by superlatives.
’When workmen strive to do better than well, They do confound their skill in
covetousness.’ (King John.)
The harmony of the soul and body, and of the parts of the soul with one another,
a harmony ’fairer than that of musical notes,’ is the true Hellenic mode of con-
ceiving the perfection of human nature.
In what may be called the epilogue of the discussion with Thrasymachus, Plato
argues that evil is not a principle of strength, but of discord and dissolution, just
touching the question which has been often treated in modern times by theo-
http://www.idph.netIDPH 23
logians and philosophers, of the negative nature of evil. In the last argument
we trace the germ of the Aristotelian doctrine of an end and a virtue directed
towards the end, which again is suggested by the arts. The final reconcilement
of justice and happiness and the identity of the individual and the State are
also intimated. Socrates reassumes the character of a ’know-nothing;’ at the
same time he appears to be not wholly satisfied with the manner in which the
argument has been conducted. Nothing is concluded; but the tendency of the
dialectical process, here as always, is to enlarge our conception of ideas, and to
widen their application to human life.
BOOK II. Thrasymachus is pacified, but the intrepid Glaucon insists on conti-
nuing the argument. He is not satisfied with the indirect manner in which, at
the end of the last book, Socrates had disposed of the question ’Whether the just
or the unjust is the happier.’ He begins by dividing goods into three classes:–
first, goods desirable in themselves; secondly, goods desirable in themselves
and for their results; thirdly, goods desirable for their results only. He then
asks Socrates in which of the three classes he would place justice. In the second
class, replies Socrates, among goods desirable for themselves and also for their
results. ’Then the world in general are of another mind, for they say that justice
belongs to the troublesome class of goods which are desirable for their results
only. Socrates answers that this is the doctrine of Thrasymachus which he re-
jects. Glaucon thinks that Thrasymachus was too ready to listen to the voice
of the charmer, and proposes to consider the nature of justice and injustice in
themselves and apart from the results and rewards of them which the world is
always dinning in his ears. He will first of all speak of the nature and origin of
justice; secondly, of the manner in which men view justice as a necessity and
not a good; and thirdly, he will prove the reasonableness of this view.
’To do injustice is said to be a good; to suffer injustice an evil. As the evil is
discovered by experience to be greater than the good, the sufferers, who cannot
also be doers, make a compact that they will have neither, and this compact or
mean is called justice, but is really the impossibility of doing injustice. No one
would observe such a compact if he were not obliged. Let us suppose that the
just and unjust have two rings, like that of Gyges in the well-known story, which
make them invisible, and then no difference will appear in them, for every one
will do evil if he can. And he who abstains will be regarded by the world as a
fool for his pains. Men may praise him in public out of fear for themselves, but
they will laugh at him in their hearts (Cp. Gorgias.)
’And now let us frame an ideal of the just and unjust. Imagine the unjust man
to be master of his craft, seldom making mistakes and easily correcting them;
having gifts of money, speech, strength–the greatest villain bearing the highest
character: and at his side let us place the just in his nobleness and simplicity–
being, not seeming–without name or reward– clothed in his justice only–the
best of men who is thought to be the worst, and let him die as he has lived. I
http://www.idph.net24 IDPH
might add (but I would rather put the rest into the mouth of the panegyrists of
injustice–they will tell you) that the just man will be scourged, racked, bound,
will have his eyes put out, and will at last be crucified (literally impaled)–and
all this because he ought to have preferred seeming to being. How different
is the case of the unjust who clings to appearance as the true reality! His high
character makes him a ruler; he can marry where he likes, trade where he likes,
help his friends and hurt his enemies; having got rich by dishonesty he can
worship the gods better, and will therefore be more loved by them than the
just.’
I was thinking what to answer, when Adeimantus joined in the already unequal
fray. He considered that the most important point of all had been omitted:–’Men
are taught to be just for the sake of rewards; parents and guardians make repu-
tation the incentive to virtue. And other advantages are promised by them of a
more solid kind, such as wealthy marriages and high offices. There are the pic-
tures in Homer and Hesiod of fat sheep and heavy fleeces, rich corn-fields and
trees toppling with fruit, which the gods provide in this life for the just. And
the Orphic poets add a similar picture of another. The heroes of Musaeus and
Eumolpus lie on couches at a festival, with garlands on their heads, enjoying as
the meed of virtue a paradise of immortal drunkenness. Some go further, and
speak of a fair posterity in the third and fourth generation. But the wicked they
bury in a slough and make them carry water in a sieve: and in this life they
attribute to them the infamy which Glaucon was assuming to be the lot of the
just who are supposed to be unjust.
’Take another kind of argument which is found both in poetry and prose:– "Vir-
tue,"as Hesiod says, "is honourable but difficult, vice is easy and profitable."You
may often see the wicked in great prosperity and the righteous afflicted by the
will of heaven. And mendicant prophets knock at rich men’s doors, promising
to atone for the sins of themselves or their fathers in an easy fashion with sacri-
fices and festive games, or with charms and invocations to get rid of an enemy
good or bad by divine help and at a small charge;–they appeal to books pro-
fessing to be written by Musaeus and Orpheus, and carry away the minds of
whole cities, and promise to "get souls out of purgatory;"and if we refuse to
listen to them, no one knows what will happen to us.
’When a lively-minded ingenuous youth hears all this, what will be his conclu-
sion? "Will he,"in the language of Pindar, "make justice his high tower, or fortify
himself with crooked deceit?"Justice, he reflects, without the appearance of jus-
tice, is misery and ruin; injustice has the promise of a glorious life. Appearance
is master of truth and lord of happiness. To appearance then I will turn,–I will
put on the show of virtue and trail behind me the fox of Archilochus. I hear
some one saying that "wickedness is not easily concealed,"to which I reply that
"nothing great is easy."Union and force and rhetoric will do much; and if men
say that they cannot prevail over the gods, still how do we know that there are
http://www.idph.netIDPH 25
gods? Only from the poets, who acknowledge that they may be appeased by
sacrifices. Then why not sin and pay for indulgences out of your sin? For if
the righteous are only unpunished, still they have no further reward, while the
wicked may be unpunished and have the pleasure of sinning too. But what of
the world below? Nay, says the argument, there are atoning powers who will
set that matter right, as the poets, who are the sons of the gods, tell us; and this
is confirmed by the authority of the State.
’How can we resist such arguments in favour of injustice? Add good manners,
and, as the wise tell us, we shall make the best of both worlds. Who that is not
a miserable caitiff will refrain from smiling at the praises of justice? Even if a
man knows the better part he will not be angry with others; for he knows also
that more than human virtue is needed to save a man, and that he only praises
justice who is incapable of injustice.
’The origin of the evil is that all men from the beginning, heroes, poets, instruc-
tors of youth, have always asserted "the temporal dispensation,"the honours
and profits of justice. Had we been taught in early youth the power of justice
and injustice inherent in the soul, and unseen by any human or divine eye, we
should not have needed others to be our guardians, but every one would have
been the guardian of himself. This is what I want you to show, Socrates;–other
men use arguments which rather tend to strengthen the position of Thrasyma-
chus that "might is right;"but from you I expect better things. And please, as
Glaucon said, to exclude reputation; let the just be thought unjust and the un-
just just, and do you still prove to us the superiority of justice’...
The thesis, which for the sake of argument has been maintained by Glaucon, is
the converse of that of Thrasymachus–not right is the interest of the stronger,
but right is the necessity of the weaker. Starting from the same premises he
carries the analysis of society a step further back;–might is still right, but the
might is the weakness of the many combined against the strength of the few.
There have been theories in modern as well as in ancient times which have a
family likeness to the speculations of Glaucon; e.g. that power is the founda-
tion of right; or that a monarch has a divine right to govern well or ill; or that
virtue is self-love or the love of power; or that war is the natural state of man; or
that private vices are public benefits. All such theories have a kind of plausibi-
lity from their partial agreement with experience. For human nature oscillates
between good and evil, and the motives of actions and the origin of instituti-
ons may be explained to a certain extent on either hypothesis according to the
character or point of view of a particular thinker. The obligation of maintai-
ning authority under all circumstances and sometimes by rather questionable
means is felt strongly and has become a sort of instinct among civilized men.
The divine right of kings, or more generally of governments, is one of the forms
under which this natural feeling is expressed. Nor again is there any evil which
http://www.idph.net26 IDPH
has not some accompaniment of good or pleasure; nor any good which is free
from some alloy of evil; nor any noble or generous thought which may not be
attended by a shadow or the ghost of a shadow of self-interest or of self- love.
We know that all human actions are imperfect; but we do not therefore attri-
bute them to the worse rather than to the better motive or principle. Such a
philosophy is both foolish and false, like that opinion of the clever rogue who
assumes all other men to be like himself. And theories of this sort do not re-
present the real nature of the State, which is based on a vague sense of right
gradually corrected and enlarged by custom and law (although capable also of
perversion), any more than they describe the origin of society, which is to be
sought in the family and in the social and religious feelings of man. Nor do
they represent the average character of individuals, which cannot be explained
simply on a theory of evil, but has always a counteracting element of good.
And as men become better such theories appear more and more untruthful to
them, because they are more conscious of their own disinterestedness. A little
experience may make a man a cynic; a great deal will bring him back to a truer
and kindlier view of the mixed nature of himself and his fellow men.
The two brothers ask Socrates to prove to them that the just is happy when
they have taken from him all that in which happiness is ordinarily supposed
to consist. Not that there is (1) any absurdity in the attempt to frame a notion
of justice apart from circumstances. For the ideal must always be a paradox
when compared with the ordinary conditions of human life. Neither the Stoical
ideal nor the Christian ideal is true as a fact, but they may serve as a basis of
education, and may exercise an ennobling influence. An ideal is none the worse
because ’some one has made the discovery’ that no such ideal was ever realized.
And in a few exceptional individuals who are raised above the ordinary level of
humanity, the ideal of happiness may be realized in death and misery. This may
be the state which the reason deliberately approves, and which the utilitarian
as well as every other moralist may be bound in certain cases to prefer.
Nor again, (2) must we forget that Plato, though he agrees generally with the
view implied in the argument of the two brothers, is not expressing his own
final conclusion, but rather seeking to dramatize one of the aspects of ethical
truth. He is developing his idea gradually in a series of positions or situations.
He is exhibiting Socrates for the first time undergoing the Socratic interrogati-
on. Lastly, (3) the word ’happiness’ involves some degree of confusion because
associated in the language of modern philosophy with conscious pleasure or
satisfaction, which was not equally present to his mind.
Glaucon has been drawing a picture of the misery of the just and the happi-
ness of the unjust, to which the misery of the tyrant in Book IX is the answer
and parallel. And still the unjust must appear just; that is ’the homage which
vice pays to virtue.’ But now Adeimantus, taking up the hint which had been
already given by Glaucon, proceeds to show that in the opinion of mankind
http://www.idph.netIDPH 27
justice is regarded only for the sake of rewards and reputation, and points out
the advantage which is given to such arguments as those of Thrasymachus and
Glaucon by the conventional morality of mankind. He seems to feel the diffi-
culty of ’justifying the ways of God to man.’ Both the brothers touch upon the
question, whether the morality of actions is determined by their consequences;
and both of them go beyond the position of Socrates, that justice belongs to the
class of goods not desirable for themselves only, but desirable for themselves
and for their results, to which he recalls them. In their attempt to view justice
as an internal principle, and in their condemnation of the poets, they anticipate
him. The common life of Greece is not enough for them; they must penetrate
deeper into the nature of things.
It has been objected that justice is honesty in the sense of Glaucon and Adei-
mantus, but is taken by Socrates to mean all virtue. May we not more truly
say that the old-fashioned notion of justice is enlarged by Socrates, and beco-
mes equivalent to universal order or well-being, first in the State, and secondly
in the individual? He has found a new answer to his old question (Protag.),
’whether the virtues are one or many,’ viz. that one is the ordering principle
of the three others. In seeking to establish the purely internal nature of justice,
he is met by the fact that man is a social being, and he tries to harmonise the
two opposite theses as well as he can. There is no more inconsistency in this
than was inevitable in his age and country; there is no use in turning upon him
the cross lights of modern philosophy, which, from some other point of view,
would appear equally inconsistent. Plato does not give the final solution of
philosophical questions for us; nor can he be judged of by our standard.
The remainder of the Republic is developed out of the question of the sons of
Ariston. Three points are deserving of remark in what immediately follows:–
First, that the answer of Socrates is altogether indirect. He does not say that
happiness consists in the contemplation of the idea of justice, and still less will
he be tempted to affirm the Stoical paradox that the just man can be happy
on the rack. But first he dwells on the difficulty of the problem and insists on
restoring man to his natural condition, before he will answer the question at all.
He too will frame an ideal, but his ideal comprehends not only abstract justice,
but the whole relations of man. Under the fanciful illustration of the large letters
he implies that he will only look for justice in society, and that from the State
he will proceed to the individual. His answer in substance amounts to this,–
that under favourable conditions, i.e. in the perfect State, justice and happiness
will coincide, and that when justice has been once found, happiness may be left
to take care of itself. That he falls into some degree of inconsistency, when in
the tenth book he claims to have got rid of the rewards and honours of justice,
may be admitted; for he has left those which exist in the perfect State. And
the philosopher ’who retires under the shelter of a wall’ can hardly have been
esteemed happy by him, at least not in this world. Still he maintains the true
http://www.idph.net28 IDPH
attitude of moral action. Let a man do his duty first, without asking whether
he will be happy or not, and happiness will be the inseparable accident which
attends him. ’Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all
these things shall be added unto you.’
Secondly, it may be remarked that Plato preserves the genuine character of Gre-
ek thought in beginning with the State and in going on to the individual. First
ethics, then politics–this is the order of ideas to us; the reverse is the order of his-
tory. Only after many struggles of thought does the individual assert his right
as a moral being. In early ages he is not ONE, but one of many, the citizen of a
State which is prior to him; and he has no notion of good or evil apart from the
law of his country or the creed of his church. And to this type he is constantly
tending to revert, whenever the influence of custom, or of party spirit, or the
recollection of the past becomes too strong for him.
Thirdly, we may observe the confusion or identification of the individual and
the State, of ethics and politics, which pervades early Greek speculation, and
even in modern times retains a certain degree of influence. The subtle diffe-
rence between the collective and individual action of mankind seems to have
escaped early thinkers, and we too are sometimes in danger of forgetting the
conditions of united human action, whenever we either elevate politics into
ethics, or lower ethics to the standard of politics. The good man and the good
citizen only coincide in the perfect State; and this perfection cannot be attai-
ned by legislation acting upon them from without, but, if at all, by education
fashioning them from within.
...Socrates praises the sons of Ariston, ’inspired offspring of the renowned he-
ro,’ as the elegiac poet terms them; but he does not understand how they can
argue so eloquently on behalf of injustice while their character shows that they
are uninfluenced by their own arguments. He knows not how to answer them,
although he is afraid of deserting justice in the hour of need. He therefore ma-
kes a condition, that having weak eyes he shall be allowed to read the large
letters first and then go on to the smaller, that is, he must look for justice in the
State first, and will then proceed to the individual. Accordingly he begins to
construct the State.
Society arises out of the wants of man. His first want is food; his second a
house; his third a coat. The sense of these needs and the possibility of satisfying
them by exchange, draw individuals together on the same spot; and this is the
beginning of a State, which we take the liberty to invent, although necessity is
the real inventor. There must be first a husbandman, secondly a builder, thirdly
a weaver, to which may be added a cobbler. Four or five citizens at least are
required to make a city. Now men have different natures, and one man will
do one thing better than many; and business waits for no man. Hence there
must be a division of labour into different employments; into wholesale and
http://www.idph.netIDPH 29
retail trade; into workers, and makers of workmen’s tools; into shepherds and
husbandmen. A city which includes all this will have far exceeded the limit of
four or five, and yet not be very large. But then again imports will be required,
and imports necessitate exports, and this implies variety of produce in order
to attract the taste of purchasers; also merchants and ships. In the city too we
must have a market and money and retail trades; otherwise buyers and sellers
will never meet, and the valuable time of the producers will be wasted in vain
efforts at exchange. If we add hired servants the State will be complete. And we
may guess that somewhere in the intercourse of the citizens with one another
justice and injustice will appear.
Here follows a rustic picture of their way of life. They spend their days in
houses which they have built for themselves; they make their own clothes and
produce their own corn and wine. Their principal food is meal and flour, and
they drink in moderation. They live on the best of terms with each other, and
take care not to have too many children. ’But,’ said Glaucon, interposing, ’are
they not to have a relish?’ Certainly; they will have salt and olives and chee-
se, vegetables and fruits, and chestnuts to roast at the fire. ”Tis a city of pigs,
Socrates.’ Why, I replied, what do you want more? ’Only the comforts of life,–
sofas and tables, also sauces and sweets.’ I see; you want not only a State,
but a luxurious State; and possibly in the more complex frame we may sooner
find justice and injustice. Then the fine arts must go to work–every conceiva-
ble instrument and ornament of luxury will be wanted. There will be dancers,
painters, sculptors, musicians, cooks, barbers, tire-women, nurses, artists; swi-
neherds and neatherds too for the animals, and physicians to cure the disorders
of which luxury is the source. To feed all these superfluous mouths we shall
need a part of our neighbour’s land, and they will want a part of ours. And this
is the origin of war, which may be traced to the same causes as other political
evils. Our city will now require the slight addition of a camp, and the citizen
will be converted into a soldier. But then again our old doctrine of the division
of labour must not be forgotten. The art of war cannot be learned in a day, and
there must be a natural aptitude for military duties. There will be some warlike
natures who have this aptitude–dogs keen of scent, swift of foot to pursue, and
strong of limb to fight. And as spirit is the foundation of courage, such natu-
res, whether of men or animals, will be full of spirit. But these spirited natures
are apt to bite and devour one another; the union of gentleness to friends and
fierceness against enemies appears to be an impossibility, and the guardian of a
State requires both qualities. Who then can be a guardian? The image of the dog
suggests an answer. For dogs are gentle to friends and fierce to strangers. Your
dog is a philosopher who judges by the rule of knowing or not knowing; and
philosophy, whether in man or beast, is the parent of gentleness. The human
watchdogs must be philosophers or lovers of learning which will make them
gentle. And how are they to be learned without education?
http://www.idph.net30 IDPH
But what shall their education be? Is any better than the old-fashioned sort whi-
ch is comprehended under the name of music and gymnastic? Music includes
literature, and literature is of two kinds, true and false. ’What do you mean?’
he said. I mean that children hear stories before they learn gymnastics, and that
the stories are either untrue, or have at most one or two grains of truth in a
bushel of falsehood. Now early life is very impressible, and children ought not
to learn what they will have to unlearn when they grow up; we must therefore
have a censorship of nursery tales, banishing some and keeping others. Some of
them are very improper, as we may see in the great instances of Homer and He-
siod, who not only tell lies but bad lies; stories about Uranus and Saturn, which
are immoral as well as false, and which should never be spoken of to young
persons, or indeed at all; or, if at all, then in a mystery, after the sacrifice, not
of an Eleusinian pig, but of some unprocurable animal. Shall our youth be en-
couraged to beat their fathers by the example of Zeus, or our citizens be incited
to quarrel by hearing or seeing representations of strife among the gods? Shall
they listen to the narrative of Hephaestus binding his mother, and of Zeus sen-
ding him flying for helping her when she was beaten? Such tales may possibly
have a mystical interpretation, but the young are incapable of understanding
allegory. If any one asks what tales are to be allowed, we will answer that we
are legislators and not book-makers; we only lay down the principles according
to which books are to be written; to write them is the duty of others.
And our first principle is, that God must be represented as he is; not as the
author of all things, but of good only. We will not suffer the poets to say that he
is the steward of good and evil, or that he has two casks full of destinies;–or that
Athene and Zeus incited Pandarus to break the treaty; or that God caused the
sufferings of Niobe, or of Pelops, or the Trojan war; or that he makes men sin
when he wishes to destroy them. Either these were not the actions of the gods,
or God was just, and men were the better for being punished. But that the deed
was evil, and God the author, is a wicked, suicidal fiction which we will allow
no one, old or young, to utter. This is our first and great principle–God is the
author of good only.
And the second principle is like unto it:–With God is no variableness or change
of form. Reason teaches us this; for if we suppose a change in God, he must
be changed either by another or by himself. By another?–but the best works of
nature and art and the noblest qualities of mind are least liable to be changed
by any external force. By himself?–but he cannot change for the better; he will
hardly change for the worse. He remains for ever fairest and best in his own
image. Therefore we refuse to listen to the poets who tell us of Here begging
in the likeness of a priestess or of other deities who prowl about at night in
strange disguises; all that blasphemous nonsense with which mothers fool the
manhood out of their children must be suppressed. But some one will say that
God, who is himself unchangeable, may take a form in relation to us. Why
http://www.idph.netIDPH 31
should he? For gods as well as men hate the lie in the soul, or principle of
falsehood; and as for any other form of lying which is used for a purpose and
is regarded as innocent in certain exceptional cases–what need have the gods
of this? For they are not ignorant of antiquity like the poets, nor are they afraid
of their enemies, nor is any madman a friend of theirs. God then is true, he
is absolutely true; he changes not, he deceives not, by day or night, by word
or sign. This is our second great principle–God is true. Away with the lying
dream of Agamemnon in Homer, and the accusation of Thetis against Apollo
in Aeschylus...
In order to give clearness to his conception of the State, Plato proceeds to trace
the first principles of mutual need and of division of labour in an imaginary
community of four or five citizens. Gradually this community increases; the
division of labour extends to countries; imports necessitate exports; a medium
of exchange is required, and retailers sit in the market- place to save the time
of the producers. These are the steps by which Plato constructs the first or
primitive State, introducing the elements of political economy by the way. As
he is going to frame a second or civilized State, the simple naturally comes
before the complex. He indulges, like Rousseau, in a picture of primitive life–
an idea which has indeed often had a powerful influence on the imagination of
mankind, but he does not seriously mean to say that one is better than the other
(Politicus); nor can any inference be drawn from the description of the first state
taken apart from the second, such as Aristotle appears to draw in the Politics.
We should not interpret a Platonic dialogue any more than a poem or a parable
in too literal or matter-of-fact a style. On the other hand, when we compare
the lively fancy of Plato with the dried-up abstractions of modern treatises on
philosophy, we are compelled to say with Protagoras, that the ’mythus is more
interesting’ (Protag.)
Several interesting remarks which in modern times would have a place in a
treatise on Political Economy are scattered up and down the writings of Pla-
to: especially Laws, Population; Free Trade; Adulteration; Wills and Bequests;
Begging; Eryxias, (though not Plato’s), Value and Demand; Republic, Division
of Labour. The last subject, and also the origin of Retail Trade, is treated with
admirable lucidity in the second book of the Republic. But Plato never combi-
ned his economic ideas into a system, and never seems to have recognized that
Trade is one of the great motive powers of the State and of the world. He would
make retail traders only of the inferior sort of citizens (Rep., Laws), though he
remarks, quaintly enough (Laws), that ’if only the best men and the best wo-
men everywhere were compelled to keep taverns for a time or to carry on retail
trade, etc., then we should knew how pleasant and agreeable all these things
are.’
The disappointment of Glaucon at the ’city of pigs,’ the ludicrous description
of the ministers of luxury in the more refined State, and the afterthought of the
http://www.idph.net32 IDPH
necessity of doctors, the illustration of the nature of the guardian taken from
the dog, the desirableness of offering some almost unprocurable victim when
impure mysteries are to be celebrated, the behaviour of Zeus to his father and of
Hephaestus to his mother, are touches of humour which have also a serious me-
aning. In speaking of education Plato rather startles us by affirming that a child
must be trained in falsehood first and in truth afterwards. Yet this is not very
different from saying that children must be taught through the medium of ima-
gination as well as reason; that their minds can only develope gradually, and
that there is much which they must learn without understanding. This is also
the substance of Plato’s view, though he must be acknowledged to have drawn
the line somewhat differently from modern ethical writers, respecting truth and
falsehood. To us, economies or accommodations would not be allowable unless
they were required by the human faculties or necessary for the communication
of knowledge to the simple and ignorant. We should insist that the word was
inseparable from the intention, and that we must not be ’falsely true,’ i.e. speak
or act falsely in support of what was right or true. But Plato would limit the use
of fictions only by requiring that they should have a good moral effect, and that
such a dangerous weapon as falsehood should be employed by the rulers alone
and for great objects.
A Greek in the age of Plato attached no importance to the question whether
his religion was an historical fact. He was just beginning to be conscious that
the past had a history; but he could see nothing beyond Homer and Hesiod.
Whether their narratives were true or false did not seriously affect the political
or social life of Hellas. Men only began to suspect that they were fictions when
they recognised them to be immoral. And so in all religions: the consideration
of their morality comes first, afterwards the truth of the documents in which
they are recorded, or of the events natural or supernatural which are told of
them. But in modern times, and in Protestant countries perhaps more than in
Catholic, we have been too much inclined to identify the historical with the
moral; and some have refused to believe in religion at all, unless a superhuman
accuracy was discernible in every part of the record. The facts of an ancient
or religious history are amongst the most important of all facts; but they are
frequently uncertain, and we only learn the true lesson which is to be gathered
from them when we place ourselves above them. These reflections tend to show
that the difference between Plato and ourselves, though not unimportant, is not
so great as might at first sight appear. For we should agree with him in placing
the moral before the historical truth of religion; and, generally, in disregarding
those errors or misstatements of fact which necessarily occur in the early stages
of all religions. We know also that changes in the traditions of a country cannot
be made in a day; and are therefore tolerant of many things which science and
criticism would condemn.
We note in passing that the allegorical interpretation of mythology, said to have
http://www.idph.netIDPH 33
been first introduced as early as the sixth century before Christ by Theagenes
of Rhegium, was well established in the age of Plato, and here, as in the Pha-
edrus, though for a different reason, was rejected by him. That anachronisms
whether of religion or law, when men have reached another stage of civilizati-
on, should be got rid of by fictions is in accordance with universal experience.
Great is the art of interpretation; and by a natural process, which when once dis-
covered was always going on, what could not be altered was explained away.
And so without any palpable inconsistency there existed side by side two forms
of religion, the tradition inherited or invented by the poets and the customary
worship of the temple; on the other hand, there was the religion of the philo-
sopher, who was dwelling in the heaven of ideas, but did not therefore refuse
to offer a cock to Aesculapius, or to be seen saying his prayers at the rising of
the sun. At length the antagonism between the popular and philosophical reli-
gion, never so great among the Greeks as in our own age, disappeared, and was
only felt like the difference between the religion of the educated and uneduca-
ted among ourselves. The Zeus of Homer and Hesiod easily passed into the
’royal mind’ of Plato (Philebus); the giant Heracles became the knight-errant
and benefactor of mankind. These and still more wonderful transformations
were readily effected by the ingenuity of Stoics and neo- Platonists in the two
or three centuries before and after Christ. The Greek and Roman religions were
gradually permeated by the spirit of philosophy; having lost their ancient me-
aning, they were resolved into poetry and morality; and probably were never
purer than at the time of their decay, when their influence over the world was
waning.
A singular conception which occurs towards the end of the book is the lie in the
soul; this is connected with the Platonic and Socratic doctrine that involuntary
ignorance is worse than voluntary. The lie in the soul is a true lie, the corruption
of the highest truth, the deception of the highest part of the soul, from which
he who is deceived has no power of delivering himself. For example, to re-
present God as false or immoral, or, according to Plato, as deluding men with
appearances or as the author of evil; or again, to affirm with Protagoras that
’knowledge is sensation,’ or that ’being is becoming,’ or with Thrasymachus
’that might is right,’ would have been regarded by Plato as a lie of this hateful
sort. The greatest unconsciousness of the greatest untruth, e.g. if, in the lan-
guage of the Gospels (John), ’he who was blind’ were to say ’I see,’ is another
aspect of the state of mind which Plato is describing. The lie in the soul may
be further compared with the sin against the Holy Ghost (Luke), allowing for
the difference between Greek and Christian modes of speaking. To this is op-
posed the lie in words, which is only such a deception as may occur in a play or
poem, or allegory or figure of speech, or in any sort of accommodation,–which
though useless to the gods may be useful to men in certain cases. Socrates is
here answering the question which he had himself raised about the propriety
of deceiving a madman; and he is also contrasting the nature of God and man.
http://www.idph.net34 IDPH
For God is Truth, but mankind can only be true by appearing sometimes to be
partial, or false. Reserving for another place the greater questions of religion
or education, we may note further, (1) the approval of the old traditional edu-
cation of Greece; (2) the preparation which Plato is making for the attack on
Homer and the poets; (3) the preparation which he is also making for the use of
economies in the State; (4) the contemptuous and at the same time euphemistic
manner in which here as below he alludes to the ’Chronique Scandaleuse’ of
the gods.
BOOK III. There is another motive in purifying religion, which is to banish fe-
ar; for no man can be courageous who is afraid of death, or who believes the
tales which are repeated by the poets concerning the world below. They must
be gently requested not to abuse hell; they may be reminded that their stori-
es are both untrue and discouraging. Nor must they be angry if we expunge
obnoxious passages, such as the depressing words of Achilles–’I would rather
be a serving-man than rule over all the dead;’ and the verses which tell of the
squalid mansions, the senseless shadows, the flitting soul mourning over lost
strength and youth, the soul with a gibber going beneath the earth like smoke,
or the souls of the suitors which flutter about like bats. The terrors and horrors
of Cocytus and Styx, ghosts and sapless shades, and the rest of their Tartarean
nomenclature, must vanish. Such tales may have their use; but they are not the
proper food for soldiers. As little can we admit the sorrows and sympathies of
the Homeric heroes:–Achilles, the son of Thetis, in tears, throwing ashes on his
head, or pacing up and down the sea-shore in distraction; or Priam, the cousin
of the gods, crying aloud, rolling in the mire. A good man is not prostrated at
the loss of children or fortune. Neither is death terrible to him; and therefore
lamentations over the dead should not be practised by men of note; they should
be the concern of inferior persons only, whether women or men. Still worse is
the attribution of such weakness to the gods; as when the goddesses say, ’Alas!
my travail!’ and worst of all, when the king of heaven himself laments his inabi-
lity to save Hector, or sorrows over the impending doom of his dear Sarpedon.
Such a character of God, if not ridiculed by our young men, is likely to be imi-
tated by them. Nor should our citizens be given to excess of laughter–’Such
violent delights’ are followed by a violent re-action. The description in the Ili-
ad of the gods shaking their sides at the clumsiness of Hephaestus will not be
admitted by us. ’Certainly not.’
Truth should have a high place among the virtues, for falsehood, as we were
saying, is useless to the gods, and only useful to men as a medicine. But this
employment of falsehood must remain a privilege of state; the common man
must not in return tell a lie to the ruler; any more than the patient would tell a
lie to his physician, or the sailor to his captain.
In the next place our youth must be temperate, and temperance consists in self-
control and obedience to authority. That is a lesson which Homer teaches in
http://www.idph.netIDPH 35
some places: ’The Achaeans marched on breathing prowess, in silent awe of
their leaders;’–but a very different one in other places: ’O heavy with wine,
who hast the eyes of a dog, but the heart of a stag.’ Language of the latter
kind will not impress self-control on the minds of youth. The same may be said
about his praises of eating and drinking and his dread of starvation; also about
the verses in which he tells of the rapturous loves of Zeus and Here, or of how
Hephaestus once detained Ares and Aphrodite in a net on a similar occasion.
There is a nobler strain heard in the words:–’Endure, my soul, thou hast endu-
red worse.’ Nor must we allow our citizens to receive bribes, or to say, ’Gifts
persuade the gods, gifts reverend kings;’ or to applaud the ignoble advice of
Phoenix to Achilles that he should get money out of the Greeks before he assis-
ted them; or the meanness of Achilles himself in taking gifts from Agamemnon;
or his requiring a ransom for the body of Hector; or his cursing of Apollo; or
his insolence to the river-god Scamander; or his dedication to the dead Patro-
clus of his own hair which had been already dedicated to the other river-god
Spercheius; or his cruelty in dragging the body of Hector round the walls, and
slaying the captives at the pyre: such a combination of meanness and cruelty in
Cheiron’s pupil is inconceivable. The amatory exploits of Peirithous and The-
seus are equally unworthy. Either these so- called sons of gods were not the
sons of gods, or they were not such as the poets imagine them, any more than
the gods themselves are the authors of evil. The youth who believes that such
things are done by those who have the blood of heaven flowing in their veins
will be too ready to imitate their example.
Enough of gods and heroes;–what shall we say about men? What the poets
and story-tellers say–that the wicked prosper and the righteous are afflicted, or
that justice is another’s gain? Such misrepresentations cannot be allowed by us.
But in this we are anticipating the definition of justice, and had therefore better
defer the enquiry.
The subjects of poetry have been sufficiently treated; next follows style. Now all
poetry is a narrative of events past, present, or to come; and narrative is of three
kinds, the simple, the imitative, and a composition of the two. An instance will
make my meaning clear. The first scene in Homer is of the last or mixed kind,
being partly description and partly dialogue. But if you throw the dialogue in-
to the ’oratio obliqua,’ the passage will run thus: The priest came and prayed
Apollo that the Achaeans might take Troy and have a safe return if Agamem-
non would only give him back his daughter; and the other Greeks assented,
but Agamemnon was wroth, and so on–The whole then becomes descriptive,
and the poet is the only speaker left; or, if you omit the narrative, the whole
becomes dialogue. These are the three styles–which of them is to be admitted
into our State? ’Do you ask whether tragedy and comedy are to be admitted?’
Yes, but also something more–Is it not doubtful whether our guardians are to
be imitators at all? Or rather, has not the question been already answered, for
http://www.idph.net36 IDPH
we have decided that one man cannot in his life play many parts, any more
than he can act both tragedy and comedy, or be rhapsodist and actor at once?
Human nature is coined into very small pieces, and as our guardians have their
own business already, which is the care of freedom, they will have enough to
do without imitating. If they imitate they should imitate, not any meanness or
baseness, but the good only; for the mask which the actor wears is apt to be-
come his face. We cannot allow men to play the parts of women, quarrelling,
weeping, scolding, or boasting against the gods,–least of all when making love
or in labour. They must not represent slaves, or bullies, or cowards, drunkards,
or madmen, or blacksmiths, or neighing horses, or bellowing bulls, or sounding
rivers, or a raging sea. A good or wise man will be willing to perform good and
wise actions, but he will be ashamed to play an inferior part which he has never
practised; and he will prefer to employ the descriptive style with as little imita-
tion as possible. The man who has no self-respect, on the contrary, will imitate
anybody and anything; sounds of nature and cries of animals alike; his who-
le performance will be imitation of gesture and voice. Now in the descriptive
style there are few changes, but in the dramatic there are a great many. Poets
and musicians use either, or a compound of both, and this compound is very
attractive to youth and their teachers as well as to the vulgar. But our State in
which one man plays one part only is not adapted for complexity. And when
one of these polyphonous pantomimic gentlemen offers to exhibit himself and
his poetry we will show him every observance of respect, but at the same time
tell him that there is no room for his kind in our State; we prefer the rough,
honest poet, and will not depart from our original models (Laws).
Next as to the music. A song or ode has three parts,–the subject, the harmony,
and the rhythm; of which the two last are dependent upon the first. As we
banished strains of lamentation, so we may now banish the mixed Lydian har-
monies, which are the harmonies of lamentation; and as our citizens are to be
temperate, we may also banish convivial harmonies, such as the Ionian and pu-
re Lydian. Two remain–the Dorian and Phrygian, the first for war, the second
for peace; the one expressive of courage, the other of obedience or instruction or
religious feeling. And as we reject varieties of harmony, we shall also reject the
many-stringed, variously- shaped instruments which give utterance to them,
and in particular the flute, which is more complex than any of them. The lyre
and the harp may be permitted in the town, and the Pan’s-pipe in the fields.
Thus we have made a purgation of music, and will now make a purgation of
metres. These should be like the harmonies, simple and suitable to the occasion.
There are four notes of the tetrachord, and there are three ratios of metre, 3/2,
2/2, 2/1, which have all their characteristics, and the feet have different cha-
racteristics as well as the rhythms. But about this you and I must ask Damon,
the great musician, who speaks, if I remember rightly, of a martial measure as
well as of dactylic, trochaic, and iambic rhythms, which he arranges so as to
equalize the syllables with one another, assigning to each the proper quantity.
http://www.idph.netIDPH 37
We only venture to affirm the general principle that the style is to conform to
the subject and the metre to the style; and that the simplicity and harmony of
the soul should be reflected in them all. This principle of simplicity has to be
learnt by every one in the days of his youth, and may be gathered anywhere,
from the creative and constructive arts, as well as from the forms of plants and
animals.
Other artists as well as poets should be warned against meanness or unseem-
liness. Sculpture and painting equally with music must conform to the law of
simplicity. He who violates it cannot be allowed to work in our city, and to cor-
rupt the taste of our citizens. For our guardians must grow up, not amid images
of deformity which will gradually poison and corrupt their souls, but in a land
of health and beauty where they will drink in from every object sweet and har-
monious influences. And of all these influences the greatest is the education
given by music, which finds a way into the innermost soul and imparts to it the
sense of beauty and of deformity. At first the effect is unconscious; but when
reason arrives, then he who has been thus trained welcomes her as the friend
whom he always knew. As in learning to read, first we acquire the elements or
letters separately, and afterwards their combinations, and cannot recognize re-
flections of them until we know the letters themselves;–in like manner we must
first attain the elements or essential forms of the virtues, and then trace their
combinations in life and experience. There is a music of the soul which answers
to the harmony of the world; and the fairest object of a musical soul is the fair
mind in the fair body. Some defect in the latter may be excused, but not in the
former. True love is the daughter of temperance, and temperance is utterly op-
posed to the madness of bodily pleasure. Enough has been said of music, which
makes a fair ending with love.
Next we pass on to gymnastics; about which I would remark, that the soul is
related to the body as a cause to an effect, and therefore if we educate the mind
we may leave the education of the body in her charge, and need only give a ge-
neral outline of the course to be pursued. In the first place the guardians must
abstain from strong drink, for they should be the last persons to lose their wits.
Whether the habits of the palaestra are suitable to them is more doubtful, for
the ordinary gymnastic is a sleepy sort of thing, and if left off suddenly is apt
to endanger health. But our warrior athletes must be wide-awake dogs, and
must also be inured to all changes of food and climate. Hence they will require
a simpler kind of gymnastic, akin to their simple music; and for their diet a rule
may be found in Homer, who feeds his heroes on roast meat only, and gives
them no fish although they are living at the sea-side, nor boiled meats which
involve an apparatus of pots and pans; and, if I am not mistaken, he nowhere
mentions sweet sauces. Sicilian cookery and Attic confections and Corinthian
courtezans, which are to gymnastic what Lydian and Ionian melodies are to
music, must be forbidden. Where gluttony and intemperance prevail the town
http://www.idph.net38 IDPH
quickly fills with doctors and pleaders; and law and medicine give themselves
airs as soon as the freemen of a State take an interest in them. But what can
show a more disgraceful state of education than to have to go abroad for justice
because you have none of your own at home? And yet there IS a worse stage
of the same disease–when men have learned to take a pleasure and pride in
the twists and turns of the law; not considering how much better it would be
for them so to order their lives as to have no need of a nodding justice. And
there is a like disgrace in employing a physician, not for the cure of wounds
or epidemic disorders, but because a man has by laziness and luxury contrac-
ted diseases which were unknown in the days of Asclepius. How simple is the
Homeric practice of medicine. Eurypylus after he has been wounded drinks a
posset of Pramnian wine, which is of a heating nature; and yet the sons of As-
clepius blame neither the damsel who gives him the drink, nor Patroclus who
is attending on him. The truth is that this modern system of nursing diseases
was introduced by Herodicus the trainer; who, being of a sickly constitution,
by a compound of training and medicine tortured first himself and then a good
many other people, and lived a great deal longer than he had any right. But
Asclepius would not practise this art, because he knew that the citizens of a
well-ordered State have no leisure to be ill, and therefore he adopted the ’kill
or cure’ method, which artisans and labourers employ. ’They must be at their
business,’ they say, ’and have no time for coddling: if they recover, well; if they
don’t, there is an end of them.’ Whereas the rich man is supposed to be a gentle-
man who can afford to be ill. Do you know a maxim of Phocylides–that ’when
a man begins to be rich’ (or, perhaps, a little sooner) ’he should practise virtue’?
But how can excessive care of health be inconsistent with an ordinary occupati-
on, and yet consistent with that practice of virtue which Phocylides inculcates?
When a student imagines that philosophy gives him a headache, he never does
anything; he is always unwell. This was the reason why Asclepius and his sons
practised no such art. They were acting in the interest of the public, and did not
wish to preserve useless lives, or raise up a puny offspring to wretched sires.
Honest diseases they honestly cured; and if a man was wounded, they applied
the proper remedies, and then let him eat and drink what he liked. But they
declined to treat intemperate and worthless subjects, even though they might
have made large fortunes out of them. As to the story of Pindar, that Asclepius
was slain by a thunderbolt for restoring a rich man to life, that is a lie–following
our old rule we must say either that he did not take bribes, or that he was not
the son of a god.
Glaucon then asks Socrates whether the best physicians and the best judges
will not be those who have had severally the greatest experience of diseases
and of crimes. Socrates draws a distinction between the two professions. The
physician should have had experience of disease in his own body, for he cures
with his mind and not with his body. But the judge controls mind by mind;
and therefore his mind should not be corrupted by crime. Where then is he
http://www.idph.netIDPH 39
to gain experience? How is he to be wise and also innocent? When young
a good man is apt to be deceived by evil-doers, because he has no pattern of
evil in himself; and therefore the judge should be of a certain age; his youth
should have been innocent, and he should have acquired insight into evil not
by the practice of it, but by the observation of it in others. This is the ideal of
a judge; the criminal turned detective is wonderfully suspicious, but when in
company with good men who have experience, he is at fault, for he foolishly
imagines that every one is as bad as himself. Vice may be known of virtue,
but cannot know virtue. This is the sort of medicine and this the sort of law
which will prevail in our State; they will be healing arts to better natures; but
the evil body will be left to die by the one, and the evil soul will be put to
death by the other. And the need of either will be greatly diminished by good
music which will give harmony to the soul, and good gymnastic which will
give health to the body. Not that this division of music and gymnastic really
corresponds to soul and body; for they are both equally concerned with the
soul, which is tamed by the one and aroused and sustained by the other. The
two together supply our guardians with their twofold nature. The passionate
disposition when it has too much gymnastic is hardened and brutalized, the
gentle or philosophic temper which has too much music becomes enervated.
While a man is allowing music to pour like water through the funnel of his
ears, the edge of his soul gradually wears away, and the passionate or spirited
element is melted out of him. Too little spirit is easily exhausted; too much
quickly passes into nervous irritability. So, again, the athlete by feeding and
training has his courage doubled, but he soon grows stupid; he is like a wild
beast, ready to do everything by blows and nothing by counsel or policy. There
are two principles in man, reason and passion, and to these, not to the soul and
body, the two arts of music and gymnastic correspond. He who mingles them
in harmonious concord is the true musician,–he shall be the presiding genius of
our State.
The next question is, Who are to be our rulers? First, the elder must rule the
younger; and the best of the elders will be the best guardians. Now they will be
the best who love their subjects most, and think that they have a common inte-
rest with them in the welfare of the state. These we must select; but they must
be watched at every epoch of life to see whether they have retained the same
opinions and held out against force and enchantment. For time and persuasion
and the love of pleasure may enchant a man into a change of purpose, and the
force of grief and pain may compel him. And therefore our guardians must be
men who have been tried by many tests, like gold in the refiner’s fire, and have
been passed first through danger, then through pleasure, and at every age have
come out of such trials victorious and without stain, in full command of them-
selves and their principles; having all their faculties in harmonious exercise for
their country’s good. These shall receive the highest honours both in life and
death. (It would perhaps be better to confine the term ’guardians’ to this select
http://www.idph.net40 IDPH
class: the younger men may be called ’auxiliaries.’)
And now for one magnificent lie, in the belief of which, Oh that we could train
our rulers!–at any rate let us make the attempt with the rest of the world. What
I am going to tell is only another version of the legend of Cadmus; but our
unbelieving generation will be slow to accept such a story. The tale must be
imparted, first to the rulers, then to the soldiers, lastly to the people. We will
inform them that their youth was a dream, and that during the time when they
seemed to be undergoing their education they were really being fashioned in
the earth, who sent them up when they were ready; and that they must protect
and cherish her whose children they are, and regard each other as brothers and
sisters. ’I do not wonder at your being ashamed to propound such a fiction.’
There is more behind. These brothers and sisters have different natures, and
some of them God framed to rule, whom he fashioned of gold; others he made
of silver, to be auxiliaries; others again to be husbandmen and craftsmen, and
these were formed by him of brass and iron. But as they are all sprung from
a common stock, a golden parent may have a silver son, or a silver parent a
golden son, and then there must be a change of rank; the son of the rich must
descend, and the child of the artisan rise, in the social scale; for an oracle says
’that the State will come to an end if governed by a man of brass or iron.’ Will
our citizens ever believe all this? ’Not in the present generation, but in the next,
perhaps, Yes.’
Now let the earthborn men go forth under the command of their rulers, and
look about and pitch their camp in a high place, which will be safe against ene-
mies from without, and likewise against insurrections from within. There let
them sacrifice and set up their tents; for soldiers they are to be and not shopke-
epers, the watchdogs and guardians of the sheep; and luxury and avarice will
turn them into wolves and tyrants. Their habits and their dwellings should cor-
respond to their education. They should have no property; their pay should
only meet their expenses; and they should have common meals. Gold and sil-
ver we will tell them that they have from God, and this divine gift in their souls
they must not alloy with that earthly dross which passes under the name of
gold. They only of the citizens may not touch it, or be under the same roof with
it, or drink from it; it is the accursed thing. Should they ever acquire houses
or lands or money of their own, they will become householders and tradesmen
instead of guardians, enemies and tyrants instead of helpers, and the hour of
ruin, both to themselves and the rest of the State, will be at hand.
The religious and ethical aspect of Plato’s education will hereafter be considered
under a separate head. Some lesser points may be more conveniently noticed
in this place.
1. The constant appeal to the authority of Homer, whom, with grave irony,
Plato, after the manner of his age, summons as a witness about ethics and psy-
http://www.idph.netIDPH 41
chology, as well as about diet and medicine; attempting to distinguish the bet-
ter lesson from the worse, sometimes altering the text from design; more than
once quoting or alluding to Homer inaccurately, after the manner of the early
logographers turning the Iliad into prose, and delighting to draw far-fetched
inferences from his words, or to make ludicrous applications of them. He does
not, like Heracleitus, get into a rage with Homer and Archilochus (Heracl.), but
uses their words and expressions as vehicles of a higher truth; not on a system
like Theagenes of Rhegium or Metrodorus, or in later times the Stoics, but as
fancy may dictate. And the conclusions drawn from them are sound, although
the premises are fictitious. These fanciful appeals to Homer add a charm to
Plato’s style, and at the same time they have the effect of a satire on the follies
of Homeric interpretation. To us (and probably to himself), although they take
the form of arguments, they are really figures of speech. They may be compared
with modern citations from Scripture, which have often a great rhetorical power
even when the original meaning of the words is entirely lost sight of. The real,
like the Platonic Socrates, as we gather from the Memorabilia of Xenophon, was
fond of making similar adaptations. Great in all ages and countries, in religion
as well as in law and literature, has been the art of interpretation.
2. ’The style is to conform to the subject and the metre to the style.’ Notwiths-
tanding the fascination which the word ’classical’ exercises over us, we can har-
dly maintain that this rule is observed in all the Greek poetry which has come
down to us. We cannot deny that the thought often exceeds the power of lu-
cid expression in Aeschylus and Pindar; or that rhetoric gets the better of the
thought in the Sophist-poet Euripides. Only perhaps in Sophocles is there a
perfect harmony of the two; in him alone do we find a grace of language like
the beauty of a Greek statue, in which there is nothing to add or to take away; at
least this is true of single plays or of large portions of them. The connection in
the Tragic Choruses and in the Greek lyric poets is not unfrequently a tangled
thread which in an age before logic the poet was unable to draw out. Many
thoughts and feelings mingled in his mind, and he had no power of disenga-
ging or arranging them. For there is a subtle influence of logic which requires to
be transferred from prose to poetry, just as the music and perfection of language
are infused by poetry into prose. In all ages the poet has been a bad judge of his
own meaning (Apol.); for he does not see that the word which is full of associa-
tions to his own mind is difficult and unmeaning to that of another; or that the
sequence which is clear to himself is puzzling to others. There are many passa-
ges in some of our greatest modern poets which are far too obscure; in which
there is no proportion between style and subject, in which any half-expressed
figure, any harsh construction, any distorted collocation of words, any remote
sequence of ideas is admitted; and there is no voice ’coming sweetly from na-
ture,’ or music adding the expression of feeling to thought. As if there could
be poetry without beauty, or beauty without ease and clearness. The obscuriti-
es of early Greek poets arose necessarily out of the state of language and logic
http://www.idph.net42 IDPH
which existed in their age. They are not examples to be followed by us; for the
use of language ought in every generation to become clearer and clearer. Like
Shakespere, they were great in spite, not in consequence, of their imperfections
of expression. But there is no reason for returning to the necessary obscurity
which prevailed in the infancy of literature. The English poets of the last cen-
tury were certainly not obscure; and we have no excuse for losing what they
had gained, or for going back to the earlier or transitional age which preceded
them. The thought of our own times has not out-stripped language; a want of
Plato’s ’art of measuring’ is the rule cause of the disproportion between them.
3. In the third book of the Republic a nearer approach is made to a theory of
art than anywhere else in Plato. His views may be summed up as follows:–
True art is not fanciful and imitative, but simple and ideal,– the expression of
the highest moral energy, whether in action or repose. To live among works
of plastic art which are of this noble and simple character, or to listen to such
strains, is the best of influences,–the true Greek atmosphere, in which youth
should be brought up. That is the way to create in them a natural good taste,
which will have a feeling of truth and beauty in all things. For though the poets
are to be expelled, still art is recognized as another aspect of reason–like love
in the Symposium, extending over the same sphere, but confined to the preli-
minary education, and acting through the power of habit; and this conception
of art is not limited to strains of music or the forms of plastic art, but pervades
all nature and has a wide kindred in the world. The Republic of Plato, like the
Athens of Pericles, has an artistic as well as a political side.
There is hardly any mention in Plato of the creative arts; only in two or three
passages does he even allude to them (Rep.; Soph.). He is not lost in rapture
at the great works of Phidias, the Parthenon, the Propylea, the statues of Zeus
or Athene. He would probably have regarded any abstract truth of number or
figure as higher than the greatest of them. Yet it is hard to suppose that so-
me influence, such as he hopes to inspire in youth, did not pass into his own
mind from the works of art which he saw around him. We are living upon the
fragments of them, and find in a few broken stones the standard of truth and
beauty. But in Plato this feeling has no expression; he nowhere says that beauty
is the object of art; he seems to deny that wisdom can take an external form
(Phaedrus); he does not distinguish the fine from the mechanical arts. Whether
or no, like some writers, he felt more than he expressed, it is at any rate remar-
kable that the greatest perfection of the fine arts should coincide with an almost
entire silence about them. In one very striking passage he tells us that a work
of art, like the State, is a whole; and this conception of a whole and the love of
the newly-born mathematical sciences may be regarded, if not as the inspiring,
at any rate as the regulating principles of Greek art (Xen. Mem.; and Sophist).
4. Plato makes the true and subtle remark that the physician had better not be
in robust health; and should have known what illness is in his own person. But
http://www.idph.netIDPH 43
the judge ought to have had no similar experience of evil; he is to be a good
man who, having passed his youth in innocence, became acquainted late in life
with the vices of others. And therefore, according to Plato, a judge should not
be young, just as a young man according to Aristotle is not fit to be a hearer of
moral philosophy. The bad, on the other hand, have a knowledge of vice, but no
knowledge of virtue. It may be doubted, however, whether this train of reflec-
tion is well founded. In a remarkable passage of the Laws it is acknowledged
that the evil may form a correct estimate of the good. The union of gentleness
and courage in Book ii. at first seemed to be a paradox, yet was afterwards as-
certained to be a truth. And Plato might also have found that the intuition of
evil may be consistent with the abhorrence of it. There is a directness of aim in
virtue which gives an insight into vice. And the knowledge of character is in
some degree a natural sense independent of any special experience of good or
evil.
5. One of the most remarkable conceptions of Plato, because un-Greek and al-
so very different from anything which existed at all in his age of the world,
is the transposition of ranks. In the Spartan state there had been enfranchise-
ment of Helots and degradation of citizens under special circumstances. And
in the ancient Greek aristocracies, merit was certainly recognized as one of the
elements on which government was based. The founders of states were sup-
posed to be their benefactors, who were raised by their great actions above the
ordinary level of humanity; at a later period, the services of warriors and le-
gislators were held to entitle them and their descendants to the privileges of
citizenship and to the first rank in the state. And although the existence of an
ideal aristocracy is slenderly proven from the remains of early Greek history,
and we have a difficulty in ascribing such a character, however the idea may
be defined, to any actual Hellenic state–or indeed to any state which has ever
existed in the world–still the rule of the best was certainly the aspiration of phi-
losophers, who probably accommodated a good deal their views of primitive
history to their own notions of good government. Plato further insists on ap-
plying to the guardians of his state a series of tests by which all those who fell
short of a fixed standard were either removed from the governing body, or not
admitted to it; and this ’academic’ discipline did to a certain extent prevail in
Greek states, especially in Sparta. He also indicates that the system of caste,
which existed in a great part of the ancient, and is by no means extinct in the
modern European world, should be set aside from time to time in favour of me-
rit. He is aware how deeply the greater part of mankind resent any interference
with the order of society, and therefore he proposes his novel idea in the form of
what he himself calls a ’monstrous fiction.’ (Compare the ceremony of prepara-
tion for the two ’great waves’ in Book v.) Two principles are indicated by him:
first, that there is a distinction of ranks dependent on circumstances prior to the
individual: second, that this distinction is and ought to be broken through by
personal qualities. He adapts mythology like the Homeric poems to the wants
http://www.idph.net44 IDPH
of the state, making ’the Phoenician tale’ the vehicle of his ideas. Every Gre-
ek state had a myth respecting its own origin; the Platonic republic may also
have a tale of earthborn men. The gravity and verisimilitude with which the
tale is told, and the analogy of Greek tradition, are a sufficient verification of
the ’monstrous falsehood.’ Ancient poetry had spoken of a gold and silver and
brass and iron age succeeding one another, but Plato supposes these differen-
ces in the natures of men to exist together in a single state. Mythology supplies
a figure under which the lesson may be taught (as Protagoras says, ’the myth
is more interesting’), and also enables Plato to touch lightly on new principles
without going into details. In this passage he shadows forth a general truth,
but he does not tell us by what steps the transposition of ranks is to be effec-
ted. Indeed throughout the Republic he allows the lower ranks to fade into the
distance. We do not know whether they are to carry arms, and whether in the
fifth book they are or are not included in the communistic regulations respec-
ting property and marriage. Nor is there any use in arguing strictly either from
a few chance words, or from the silence of Plato, or in drawing inferences which
were beyond his vision. Aristotle, in his criticism on the position of the lower
classes, does not perceive that the poetical creation is ’like the air, invulnerable,’
and cannot be penetrated by the shafts of his logic (Pol.).
6. Two paradoxes which strike the modern reader as in the highest degree fanci-
ful and ideal, and which suggest to him many reflections, are to be found in the
third book of the Republic: first, the great power of music, so much beyond any
influence which is experienced by us in modern times, when the art or science
has been far more developed, and has found the secret of harmony, as well as
of melody; secondly, the indefinite and almost absolute control which the soul
is supposed to exercise over the body.
In the first we suspect some degree of exaggeration, such as we may also ob-
serve among certain masters of the art, not unknown to us, at the present day.
With this natural enthusiasm, which is felt by a few only, there seems to mingle
in Plato a sort of Pythagorean reverence for numbers and numerical proporti-
on to which Aristotle is a stranger. Intervals of sound and number are to him
sacred things which have a law of their own, not dependent on the variations
of sense. They rise above sense, and become a connecting link with the world
of ideas. But it is evident that Plato is describing what to him appears to be
also a fact. The power of a simple and characteristic melody on the impressible
mind of the Greek is more than we can easily appreciate. The effect of national
airs may bear some comparison with it. And, besides all this, there is a confu-
sion between the harmony of musical notes and the harmony of soul and body,
which is so potently inspired by them.
The second paradox leads up to some curious and interesting questions–How
far can the mind control the body? Is the relation between them one of mutual
antagonism or of mutual harmony? Are they two or one, and is either of them
http://www.idph.netIDPH 45
the cause of the other? May we not at times drop the opposition between them,
and the mode of describing them, which is so familiar to us, and yet hardly
conveys any precise meaning, and try to view this composite creature, man, in
a more simple manner? Must we not at any rate admit that there is in human
nature a higher and a lower principle, divided by no distinct line, which at ti-
mes break asunder and take up arms against one another? Or again, they are
reconciled and move together, either unconsciously in the ordinary work of life,
or consciously in the pursuit of some noble aim, to be attained not without an
effort, and for which every thought and nerve are strained. And then the body
becomes the good friend or ally, or servant or instrument of the mind. And the
mind has often a wonderful and almost superhuman power of banishing disea-
se and weakness and calling out a hidden strength. Reason and the desires, the
intellect and the senses are brought into harmony and obedience so as to form
a single human being. They are ever parting, ever meeting; and the identity
or diversity of their tendencies or operations is for the most part unnoticed by
us. When the mind touches the body through the appetites, we acknowledge
the responsibility of the one to the other. There is a tendency in us which says
’Drink.’ There is another which says, ’Do not drink; it is not good for you.’ And
we all of us know which is the rightful superior. We are also responsible for our
health, although into this sphere there enter some elements of necessity which
may be beyond our control. Still even in the management of health, care and
thought, continued over many years, may make us almost free agents, if we do
not exact too much of ourselves, and if we acknowledge that all human freedom
is limited by the laws of nature and of mind.
We are disappointed to find that Plato, in the general condemnation which he
passes on the practice of medicine prevailing in his own day, depreciates the
effects of diet. He would like to have diseases of a definite character and capable
of receiving a definite treatment. He is afraid of invalidism interfering with the
business of life. He does not recognize that time is the great healer both of
mental and bodily disorders; and that remedies which are gradual and proceed
little by little are safer than those which produce a sudden catastrophe. Neither
does he see that there is no way in which the mind can more surely influence the
body than by the control of eating and drinking; or any other action or occasion
of human life on which the higher freedom of the will can be more simple or
truly asserted.
7. Lesser matters of style may be remarked.
(1) The affected ignorance of music, which is Plato’s way of expressing that he
is passing lightly over the subject.
(2) The tentative manner in which here, as in the second book, he proceeds with
the construction of the State.
http://www.idph.net46 IDPH
(3) The description of the State sometimes as a reality, and then again as a work
of imagination only; these are the arts by which he sustains the reader’s interest.
(4) Connecting links, or the preparation for the entire expulsion of the poets in
Book X.
(5) The companion pictures of the lover of litigation and the valetudinarian, the
satirical jest about the maxim of Phocylides, the manner in which the image of
the gold and silver citizens is taken up into the subject, and the argument from
the practice of Asclepius, should not escape notice.
BOOK IV. Adeimantus said: ’Suppose a person to argue, Socrates, that you ma-
ke your citizens miserable, and this by their own free-will; they are the lords of
the city, and yet instead of having, like other men, lands and houses and money
of their own, they live as mercenaries and are always mounting guard.’ You
may add, I replied, that they receive no pay but only their food, and have no
money to spend on a journey or a mistress. ’Well, and what answer do you
give?’ My answer is, that our guardians may or may not be the happiest of
men,–I should not be surprised to find in the long- run that they were,–but this
is not the aim of our constitution, which was designed for the good of the who-
le and not of any one part. If I went to a sculptor and blamed him for having
painted the eye, which is the noblest feature of the face, not purple but black,
he would reply: ’The eye must be an eye, and you should look at the statue
as a whole.’ ’Now I can well imagine a fool’s paradise, in which everybody is
eating and drinking, clothed in purple and fine linen, and potters lie on sofas
and have their wheel at hand, that they may work a little when they please; and
cobblers and all the other classes of a State lose their distinctive character. And
a State may get on without cobblers; but when the guardians degenerate into
boon companions, then the ruin is complete. Remember that we are not talking
of peasants keeping holiday, but of a State in which every man is expected to
do his own work. The happiness resides not in this or that class, but in the
State as a whole. I have another remark to make:–A middle condition is best
for artisans; they should have money enough to buy tools, and not enough to
be independent of business. And will not the same condition be best for our
citizens? If they are poor, they will be mean; if rich, luxurious and lazy; and in
neither case contented. ’But then how will our poor city be able to go to war
against an enemy who has money?’ There may be a difficulty in fighting against
one enemy; against two there will be none. In the first place, the contest will be
carried on by trained warriors against well-to-do citizens: and is not a regular
athlete an easy match for two stout opponents at least? Suppose also, that be-
fore engaging we send ambassadors to one of the two cities, saying, ’Silver and
gold we have not; do you help us and take our share of the spoil;’–who would
fight against the lean, wiry dogs, when they might join with them in preying
upon the fatted sheep? ’But if many states join their resources, shall we not be
in danger?’ I am amused to hear you use the word ’state’ of any but our own
http://www.idph.netIDPH 47
State. They are ’states,’ but not ’a state’–many in one. For in every state there
are two hostile nations, rich and poor, which you may set one against the other.
But our State, while she remains true to her principles, will be in very deed the
mightiest of Hellenic states.
To the size of the state there is no limit but the necessity of unity; it must be
neither too large nor too small to be one. This is a matter of secondary impor-
tance, like the principle of transposition which was intimated in the parable of
the earthborn men. The meaning there implied was that every man should do
that for which he was fitted, and be at one with himself, and then the whole city
would be united. But all these things are secondary, if education, which is the
great matter, be duly regarded. When the wheel has once been set in motion,
the speed is always increasing; and each generation improves upon the prece-
ding, both in physical and moral qualities. The care of the governors should be
directed to preserve music and gymnastic from innovation; alter the songs of a
country, Damon says, and you will soon end by altering its laws. The change
appears innocent at first, and begins in play; but the evil soon becomes serious,
working secretly upon the characters of individuals, then upon social and com-
mercial relations, and lastly upon the institutions of a state; and there is ruin and
confusion everywhere. But if education remains in the established form, there
will be no danger. A restorative process will be always going on; the spirit of
law and order will raise up what has fallen down. Nor will any regulations be
needed for the lesser matters of life–rules of deportment or fashions of dress.
Like invites like for good or for evil. Education will correct deficiencies and
supply the power of self-government. Far be it from us to enter into the par-
ticulars of legislation; let the guardians take care of education, and education
will take care of all other things.
But without education they may patch and mend as they please; they will ma-
ke no progress, any more than a patient who thinks to cure himself by some
favourite remedy and will not give up his luxurious mode of living. If you tell
such persons that they must first alter their habits, then they grow angry; they
are charming people. ’Charming,–nay, the very reverse.’ Evidently these gen-
tlemen are not in your good graces, nor the state which is like them. And such
states there are which first ordain under penalty of death that no one shall al-
ter the constitution, and then suffer themselves to be flattered into and out of
anything; and he who indulges them and fawns upon them, is their leader and
saviour. ’Yes, the men are as bad as the states.’ But do you not admire their
cleverness? ’Nay, some of them are stupid enough to believe what the people
tell them.’ And when all the world is telling a man that he is six feet high, and
he has no measure, how can he believe anything else? But don’t get into a pas-
sion: to see our statesmen trying their nostrums, and fancying that they can cut
off at a blow the Hydra-like rogueries of mankind, is as good as a play. Minute
enactments are superfluous in good states, and are useless in bad ones.
http://www.idph.net48 IDPH
And now what remains of the work of legislation? Nothing for us; but to Apollo
the god of Delphi we leave the ordering of the greatest of all things–that is to
say, religion. Only our ancestral deity sitting upon the centre and navel of the
earth will be trusted by us if we have any sense, in an affair of such magnitude.
No foreign god shall be supreme in our realms...
Here, as Socrates would say, let us ’reflect on’ (Greek) what has preceded: thus
far we have spoken not of the happiness of the citizens, but only of the well-
being of the State. They may be the happiest of men, but our principal aim
in founding the State was not to make them happy. They were to be guardi-
ans, not holiday-makers. In this pleasant manner is presented to us the famous
question both of ancient and modern philosophy, touching the relation of duty
to happiness, of right to utility.
First duty, then happiness, is the natural order of our moral ideas. The utilitari-
an principle is valuable as a corrective of error, and shows to us a side of ethics
which is apt to be neglected. It may be admitted further that right and utility are
co-extensive, and that he who makes the happiness of mankind his object has
one of the highest and noblest motives of human action. But utility is not the
historical basis of morality; nor the aspect in which moral and religious ideas
commonly occur to the mind. The greatest happiness of all is, as we believe, the
far-off result of the divine government of the universe. The greatest happiness
of the individual is certainly to be found in a life of virtue and goodness. But we
seem to be more assured of a law of right than we can be of a divine purpose,
that ’all mankind should be saved;’ and we infer the one from the other. And
the greatest happiness of the individual may be the reverse of the greatest hap-
piness in the ordinary sense of the term, and may be realised in a life of pain, or
in a voluntary death. Further, the word ’happiness’ has several ambiguities; it
may mean either pleasure or an ideal life, happiness subjective or objective, in
this world or in another, of ourselves only or of our neighbours and of all men
everywhere. By the modern founder of Utilitarianism the self-regarding and di-
sinterested motives of action are included under the same term, although they
are commonly opposed by us as benevolence and self-love. The word happi-
ness has not the definiteness or the sacredness of ’truth’ and ’right’; it does not
equally appeal to our higher nature, and has not sunk into the conscience of
mankind. It is associated too much with the comforts and conveniences of life;
too little with ’the goods of the soul which we desire for their own sake.’ In
a great trial, or danger, or temptation, or in any great and heroic action, it is
scarcely thought of. For these reasons ’the greatest happiness’ principle is not
the true foundation of ethics. But though not the first principle, it is the second,
which is like unto it, and is often of easier application. For the larger part of
human actions are neither right nor wrong, except in so far as they tend to the
happiness of mankind (Introd. to Gorgias and Philebus).
The same question reappears in politics, where the useful or expedient seems
http://www.idph.netIDPH 49
to claim a larger sphere and to have a greater authority. For concerning politi-
cal measures, we chiefly ask: How will they affect the happiness of mankind?
Yet here too we may observe that what we term expediency is merely the law
of right limited by the conditions of human society. Right and truth are the
highest aims of government as well as of individuals; and we ought not to lo-
se sight of them because we cannot directly enforce them. They appeal to the
better mind of nations; and sometimes they are too much for merely temporal
interests to resist. They are the watchwords which all men use in matters of pu-
blic policy, as well as in their private dealings; the peace of Europe may be said
to depend upon them. In the most commercial and utilitarian states of society
the power of ideas remains. And all the higher class of statesmen have in them
something of that idealism which Pericles is said to have gathered from the tea-
ching of Anaxagoras. They recognise that the true leader of men must be above
the motives of ambition, and that national character is of greater value than ma-
terial comfort and prosperity. And this is the order of thought in Plato; first, he
expects his citizens to do their duty, and then under favourable circumstances,
that is to say, in a well-ordered State, their happiness is assured. That he was far
from excluding the modern principle of utility in politics is sufficiently evident
from other passages; in which ’the most beneficial is affirmed to be the most
honourable’, and also ’the most sacred’.
We may note
(1) The manner in which the objection of Adeimantus here, is designed to draw
out and deepen the argument of Socrates.
(2) The conception of a whole as lying at the foundation both of politics and
of art, in the latter supplying the only principle of criticism, which, under the
various names of harmony, symmetry, measure, proportion, unity, the Greek
seems to have applied to works of art.
(3) The requirement that the State should be limited in size, after the traditional
model of a Greek state; as in the Politics of Aristotle, the fact that the cities of
Hellas were small is converted into a principle.
(4) The humorous pictures of the lean dogs and the fatted sheep, of the light
active boxer upsetting two stout gentlemen at least, of the ’charming’ patients
who are always making themselves worse; or again, the playful assumption
that there is no State but our own; or the grave irony with which the statesman
is excused who believes that he is six feet high because he is told so, and having
nothing to measure with is to be pardoned for his ignorance–he is too amusing
for us to be seriously angry with him.
(5) The light and superficial manner in which religion is passed over when pro-
vision has been made for two great principles,–first, that religion shall be based
on the highest conception of the gods, secondly, that the true national or Helle-
http://www.idph.net50 IDPH
nic type shall be maintained...
Socrates proceeds: But where amid all this is justice? Son of Ariston, tell me
where. Light a candle and search the city, and get your brother and the rest of
our friends to help in seeking for her. ’That won’t do,’ replied Glaucon, ’you
yourself promised to make the search and talked about the impiety of deserting
justice.’ Well, I said, I will lead the way, but do you follow. My notion is,
that our State being perfect will contain all the four virtues–wisdom, courage,
temperance, justice. If we eliminate the three first, the unknown remainder will
be justice.
First then, of wisdom: the State which we have called into being will be wise
because politic. And policy is one among many kinds of skill,–not the skill of
the carpenter, or of the worker in metal, or of the husbandman, but the skill
of him who advises about the interests of the whole State. Of such a kind is
the skill of the guardians, who are a small class in number, far smaller than the
blacksmiths; but in them is concentrated the wisdom of the State. And if this
small ruling class have wisdom, then the whole State will be wise.
Our second virtue is courage, which we have no difficulty in finding in another
class–that of soldiers. Courage may be defined as a sort of salvation–the never-
failing salvation of the opinions which law and education have prescribed con-
cerning dangers. You know the way in which dyers first prepare the white
ground and then lay on the dye of purple or of any other colour. Colours dyed
in this way become fixed, and no soap or lye will ever wash them out. Now the
ground is education, and the laws are the colours; and if the ground is properly
laid, neither the soap of pleasure nor the lye of pain or fear will ever wash them
out. This power which preserves right opinion about danger I would ask you to
call ’courage,’ adding the epithet ’political’ or ’civilized’ in order to distinguish
it from mere animal courage and from a higher courage which may hereafter be
discussed.
Two virtues remain; temperance and justice. More than the preceding virtues
temperance suggests the idea of harmony. Some light is thrown upon the nature
of this virtue by the popular description of a man as ’master of himself’–which
has an absurd sound, because the master is also the servant. The expression
really means that the better principle in a man masters the worse. There are in
cities whole classes–women, slaves and the like–who correspond to the worse,
and a few only to the better; and in our State the former class are held under
control by the latter. Now to which of these classes does temperance belong?
’To both of them.’ And our State if any will be the abode of temperance; and
we were right in describing this virtue as a harmony which is diffused through
the whole, making the dwellers in the city to be of one mind, and attuning the
upper and middle and lower classes like the strings of an instrument, whether
you suppose them to differ in wisdom, strength or wealth.
http://www.idph.netIDPH 51
And now we are near the spot; let us draw in and surround the cover and
watch with all our eyes, lest justice should slip away and escape. Tell me, if
you see the thicket move first. ’Nay, I would have you lead.’ Well then, offer
up a prayer and follow. The way is dark and difficult; but we must push on. I
begin to see a track. ’Good news.’ Why, Glaucon, our dulness of scent is quite
ludicrous! While we are straining our eyes into the distance, justice is tumbling
out at our feet. We are as bad as people looking for a thing which they have
in their hands. Have you forgotten our old principle of the division of labour,
or of every man doing his own business, concerning which we spoke at the
foundation of the State–what but this was justice? Is there any other virtue
remaining which can compete with wisdom and temperance and courage in
the scale of political virtue? For ’every one having his own’ is the great object of
government; and the great object of trade is that every man should do his own
business. Not that there is much harm in a carpenter trying to be a cobbler, or
a cobbler transforming himself into a carpenter; but great evil may arise from
the cobbler leaving his last and turning into a guardian or legislator, or when
a single individual is trainer, warrior, legislator, all in one. And this evil is
injustice, or every man doing another’s business. I do not say that as yet we are
in a condition to arrive at a final conclusion. For the definition which we believe
to hold good in states has still to be tested by the individual. Having read the
large letters we will now come back to the small. From the two together a
brilliant light may be struck out...
Socrates proceeds to discover the nature of justice by a method of residues. Ea-
ch of the first three virtues corresponds to one of the three parts of the soul and
one of the three classes in the State, although the third, temperance, has more
of the nature of a harmony than the first two. If there be a fourth virtue, that
can only be sought for in the relation of the three parts in the soul or classes
in the State to one another. It is obvious and simple, and for that very reason
has not been found out. The modern logician will be inclined to object that
ideas cannot be separated like chemical substances, but that they run into one
another and may be only different aspects or names of the same thing, and such
in this instance appears to be the case. For the definition here given of justice is
verbally the same as one of the definitions of temperance given by Socrates in
the Charmides, which however is only provisional, and is afterwards rejected.
And so far from justice remaining over when the other virtues are eliminated,
the justice and temperance of the Republic can with difficulty be distinguished.
Temperance appears to be the virtue of a part only, and one of three, whereas
justice is a universal virtue of the whole soul. Yet on the other hand temperan-
ce is also described as a sort of harmony, and in this respect is akin to justice.
Justice seems to differ from temperance in degree rather than in kind; whereas
temperance is the harmony of discordant elements, justice is the perfect order
by which all natures and classes do their own business, the right man in the
right place, the division and co-operation of all the citizens. Justice, again, is a
http://www.idph.net52 IDPH
more abstract notion than the other virtues, and therefore, from Plato’s point of
view, the foundation of them, to which they are referred and which in idea pre-
cedes them. The proposal to omit temperance is a mere trick of style intended
to avoid monotony.
There is a famous question discussed in one of the earlier Dialogues of Plato
(Protagoras; Arist. Nic. Ethics), ’Whether the virtues are one or many?’ This re-
ceives an answer which is to the effect that there are four cardinal virtues (now
for the first time brought together in ethical philosophy), and one supreme over
the rest, which is not like Aristotle’s conception of universal justice, virtue re-
lative to others, but the whole of virtue relative to the parts. To this universal
conception of justice or order in the first education and in the moral nature of
man, the still more universal conception of the good in the second education
and in the sphere of speculative knowledge seems to succeed. Both might be
equally described by the terms ’law,’ ’order,’ ’harmony;’ but while the idea of
good embraces ’all time and all existence,’ the conception of justice is not exten-
ded beyond man.
...Socrates is now going to identify the individual and the State. But first he
must prove that there are three parts of the individual soul. His argument is
as follows:–Quantity makes no difference in quality. The word ’just,’ whether
applied to the individual or to the State, has the same meaning. And the term
’justice’ implied that the same three principles in the State and in the individual
were doing their own business. But are they really three or one? The question
is difficult, and one which can hardly be solved by the methods which we are
now using; but the truer and longer way would take up too much of our time.
’The shorter will satisfy me.’ Well then, you would admit that the qualities of
states mean the qualities of the individuals who compose them? The Scythians
and Thracians are passionate, our own race intellectual, and the Egyptians and
Phoenicians covetous, because the individual members of each have such and
s 
ly the staff of Lynchburg General but other people, too, were
already gathering to help. Michael Sullivan, our neighbor and the rector in our Episcopal
church, arrived at the ER about an hour after Holley. Just as Holley had run out the
door to follow the ambulance, her cell phone had buzzed. It was her longtime friend
Sylvia White. Sylvia always had an uncanny way of reaching out precisely whenimportant things were happening. Holley was convinced she was psychic. (I had opted
for the safer and more sensible explanation that she was just a very good guesser.)
Holley briefed Sylvia on what was happening, and between them they made calls to my
immediate family: my younger sister, Betsy, who lived nearby, my sister Phyllis, at
forty-eight the youngest of us, who was living in Boston, and Jean, the oldest.
That Monday morning Jean was driving south through Virginia from her home in
Delaware. Fortuitously, she was on her way to help our mother, who lived in Winston-
Salem. Jean’s cell phone rang. It was her husband, David.
“Have you gone through Richmond yet?” he asked.
“No,
” Jean said.
“I’m just north of it on I-95.
”
“Get onto route 60 West, then route 24 down to Lynchburg. Holley just called.
Eben’s in the emergency room there. He had a seizure this morning and isn’t
responding.
”
“Oh, my God! Do they have any idea why?”
“They’re not sure, but it might be meningitis.
”
Jean made the turn just in time and followed the undulating two-lane blacktop of 60
West through low, scudding clouds, toward Route 24 and Lynchburg.
It was Phyllis who, at three o’clock that first afternoon of the emergency, called
Eben IV at his apartment at the University of Delaware. Eben was outside on his porch
doing some science homework (my own dad had been a neurosurgeon, and Eben was
interested in that career now as well) when his phone rang. Phyllis gave him a quick
rundown of the situation and told him not to worry—that the doctors had everything
under control.
“Do they have any idea what it might be?” Eben asked.
“Well, they did mention gram-negative bacteria and meningitis.
”
“I have two exams in the next few days, so I’m going to leave some quick messages
with my teachers,
” said Eben.
Eben later told me that, initially, he was hesitant to believe that I was in as grave
danger as Phyllis had indicated, since she and Holley always “blew things out of
proportion”
—and I never got sick. But when Michael Sullivan called him on the phone
an hour later, he realized that he needed to make the drive down—immediately.
As Eben drove toward Virginia, an icy pelting rain started up. Phyllis had left Boston
at six o’clock, and as Eben headed toward the I-495 bridge over the Potomac River into
Virginia, she was passing through the clouds overhead. She landed at Richmond, rented
a car, and got onto Route 60 herself.
When he was just a few miles outside Lynchburg, Eben called Holley.
“How’s Bond?” he asked.
“Asleep,
” Holley said.
“I’m going to go straight to the hospital then,
” Eben said.“You sure you don’t want to come home first?”
“No,
” Eben said.
“I just want to see Dad.
”
Eben pulled up at the Medical Intensive Care Unit at 11:15 P.M. The walkway into the
hospital was starting to ice over, and when he came into the bright lights of the
reception area he saw only a night reception nurse. She led him to my ICU bed.
By that point, everyone who had been there earlier had finally gone home. The only
sounds in the large, dimly lit room were the quiet beeps and hisses of the machines
keeping my body going.
Eben froze in the doorway when he saw me. In his twenty years, he’d never seen
me with more than a cold. Now, in spite of all the machines doing their best to make it
seem otherwise, he was looking at what he knew was, essentially, a corpse. My
physical body was there in front of him, but the dad he knew was gone.
Or perhaps a better word to use is: elsewhere.5.
Underworld
Darkness, but a visible darkness—like being submerged in mud yet also being able to
see through it. Or maybe dirty Jell-O describes it better. Transparent, but in a bleary,
blurry, claustrophobic, suffocating kind of way.
Consciousness, but consciousness without memory or identity—like a dream where
you know what’s going on around you, but have no real idea of who, or what, you are.
Sound, too: a deep, rhythmic pounding, distant yet strong, so that each pulse of it
goes right through you. Like a heartbeat? A little, but darker, more mechanical—like the
sound of metal against metal, as if a giant, subterranean blacksmith is pounding an anvil
somewhere off in the distance: pounding it so hard that the sound vibrates through the
earth, or the mud, or wherever it is that you are.
I didn’t have a body—not one that I was aware of anyway. I was simply . . . there,
in this place of pulsing, pounding darkness. At the time, I might have called it
“primordial.
” But at the time it was going on, I didn’t know this word. In fact, I didn’t
know any words at all. The words used here registered much later, when, back in the
world, I was writing down my recollections. Language, emotion, logic: these were all
gone, as if I had regressed back to some state of being from the very beginnings of life,
as far back, perhaps, as the primitive bacteria that, unbeknownst to me, had taken over
my brain and shut it down.
How long did I reside in this world? I have no idea. When you go to a place where
there’s no sense of time as we experience it in the ordinary world, accurately
describing the way it feels is next to impossible. When it was happening, when I was
there, I felt like I (whatever “I” was) had always been there and would always continue
to be.
Nor, initially at least, did I mind this. Why would I, after all, since this state of being
was the only one I’d ever known? Having no memory of anything better, I was not
particularly bothered by where I was. I do recall conceptualizing that I might or might
not survive, but my indifference as to whether I did or not only gave me a greater
feeling of invulnerability. I was clueless as to the rules that governed this world I was
in, but I was in no hurry to learn them. After all, why bother?
I can’t say exactly when it happened, but at a certain point I became aware of some
objects around me. They were a little like roots, and a little like blood vessels in a vast,
muddy womb. Glowing a dark, dirty red, they reached down from some place far
above to some other place equally far below. In retrospect, looking at them was likebeing a mole or earthworm, buried deep in the ground yet somehow able to see the
tangled matrixes of roots and trees surrounding it.
That’s why, thinking back to this place later, I came to call it the Realm of the
Earthworm’s-Eye View. For a long time, I suspected it might have been some kind of
memory of what my brain felt like during the period when the bacteria were originally
overrunning it.
But the more I thought about this explanation (and again, this was all much, much
later), the less sense it made. Because—hard as this is to picture if you haven’t been to
this place yourself—my consciousness wasn’t foggy or distorted when I was there. It
was just . . . limited. I wasn’t human while I was in this place. I wasn’t even animal. I
was something before, and below, all that. I was simply a lone point of awareness in a
timeless red-brown sea.
The longer I stayed in this place, the less comfortable I became. At first I was so
deeply immersed in it that there was no difference between “me” and the half-creepy,
half-familiar element that surrounded me. But gradually this sense of deep, timeless, and
boundaryless immersion gave way to something else: a feeling like I wasn’t really part
of this subterranean world at all, but trapped in it.
Grotesque animal faces bubbled out of the muck, groaned or screeched, and then
were gone again. I heard an occasional dull roar. Sometimes these roars changed to
dim, rhythmic chants, chants that were both terrifying and weirdly familiar—as if at
some point I’d known and uttered them all myself.
As I had no memory of prior existence, my time in this realm stretched way, way
out. Months? Y ears? Eternity? Regardless of the answer, I eventually got to a point
where the creepy-crawly feeling totally outweighed the homey, familiar feeling. The
more I began to feel like a me—like something separate from the cold and wet and dark
around me—the more the faces that bubbled up out of that darkness became ugly and
threatening. The rhythmic pounding off in the distance sharpened and intensified as well
—became the work-beat for some army of troll-like underground laborers, performing
some endless, brutally monotonous task. The movement around me became less visual
and more tactile, as if reptilian, wormlike creatures were crowding past, occasionally
rubbing up against me with their smooth or spiky skins.
Then I became aware of a smell: a little like feces, a little like blood, and a little like
vomit. A biological smell, in other words, but of biological death, not of biological life.
As my awareness sharpened more and more, I edged ever closer to panic. Whoever or
whatever I was, I did not belong here. I needed to get out.
But where would I go?
Even as I asked that question, something new emerged from the darkness above:
something that wasn’t cold, or dead, or dark, but the exact opposite of all those things.
If I tried for the rest of my life, I would never be able to do justice to this entity thatnow approached me . . . to come anywhere close to describing how beautiful it was.
But I’m going to try.6.
An Anchor to Life
Phyllis pulled into the hospital parking lot just under two hours after Eben IV had, at
around 1 A.M. When she got to my ICU room she found Eben IV sitting next to my
bed, clutching a hospital pillow in front of him to help him keep awake.
“Mom’s home with Bond,
” Eben said, in a tone that was tired, tense, and happy to
see her, all at once.
Phyllis told Eben he needed to go home, that if he stayed up all night after driving
from Delaware he’d be worthless to anyone tomorrow, his dad included. She called
Holley and Jean at our house and told them Eben IV would be back soon but that she
was staying in my room for the night.
“Go home to your mom and your aunt and your brother,
” she said to Eben IV when
she’d hung up.
“They need you. Y our dad and I will be right here when you get back
tomorrow.
”
Eben IV looked over at my body: at the clear plastic breathing tube running through
my right nostril down to my trachea; at my thin, already chapping lips; at my closed
eyes and sagging facial muscles.
Phyllis read his thoughts.
“Go home, Eben. Try not to worry. Y our dad’s still with us. And I’m not going to
let him go.
”
She walked to my bedside, picked up my hand, and started to massage it. With only
the machines and the night nurse who came in to check my stats every hour for
company, Phyllis sat through the rest of the night, holding my hand, keeping a
connection going that she knew full well was vital if I was going to get through this.
It’s a cliché to talk about what a big emphasis people in the South put on family, but
like a lot of clichés, it’s also true. When I went to Harvard in 1988, one of the first
things I noticed about northerners was the way they were a little shyer about
expressing a fact that many in the South take for granted: Your family is who you are.
Throughout my own life, my relationship with my family—with my parents and
sisters, and later with Holley, Eben IV , and Bond—had always been a vital source of
strength and stability, but even more so in recent years. Family was where I turned for
unquestioning support in a world that—North or South—can all too often be short of
this commodity.
I went to our Episcopal church with Holley and the kids on occasion. But the fact
was that for years I’d only been a step above a “C & E’er” (one who only darkens thedoor of a church at Christmas and Easter). I encouraged our boys to say their prayers
at night, but I was no spiritual leader in our home. I’d never escaped my feelings of
doubt at how any of it could really be. As much as I’d grown up wanting to believe in
God and Heaven and an afterlife, my decades in the rigorous scientific world of
academic neurosurgery had profoundly called into question how such things could
exist. Modern neuroscience dictates that the brain gives rise to consciousness—to the
mind, to the soul, to the spirit, to whatever you choose to call that invisible, intangible
part of us that truly makes us who we are—and I had little doubt that it was correct.
Like most health-care workers who deal directly with dying patients and their
families, I had heard about—and even seen—some pretty inexplicable events over the
years. I filed those occurrences under “unknown” and let them be, figuring a
commonsense answer of one kind or another lay at the heart of them all.
Not that I was opposed to supernatural beliefs. As a doctor who saw incredible
physical and emotional suffering on a regular basis, the last thing I would have wanted
to do was to deny anyone the comfort and hope that faith provided. In fact, I would
have loved to have enjoyed some of it myself.
The older I got, however, the less likely that seemed. Like an ocean wearing away a
beach, over the years my scientific worldview gently but steadily undermined my ability
to believe in something larger. Science seemed to be providing a steady onslaught of
evidence that pushed our significance in the universe ever closer to zero. Belief would
have been nice. But science is not concerned with what would be nice. It’s concerned
with what is.
I’m a kinetic learner, which is just to say that I learn by doing. If I can’t feel
something or touch it myself, it’s hard for me to take interest in it. That desire to reach
out and touch whatever I’m trying to understand was, along with the desire to be like
my father, what drew me to neurosurgery. As abstract and mysterious as the human
brain is, it’s also incredibly concrete. As a medical student at Duke, I relished looking
into a microscope and actually seeing the delicately elongated neuronal cells that spark
the synaptic connections that give rise to consciousness. I loved the combination of
abstract knowledge and total physicality that brain surgery presented. To access the
brain, one must pull away the layers of skin and tissue covering the skull and apply a
high-speed pneumatic device called a Midas Rex drill. It’s a very sophisticated piece of
equipment, costing thousands of dollars. Y et when you get down to it, it’s also just . . .
a drill.
Likewise, surgically repairing the brain, while an extraordinarily complex
undertaking, is actually no different than fixing any other highly delicate, electrically
charged machine. That, I knew full well, is what the brain really is: a machine that
produces the phenomenon of consciousness. Sure, scientists hadn’t discovered exactly
how the neurons of the brain managed to do this, but it was only a matter of timebefore they would. This was proven every day in the operating room. A patient comes
in with headaches and diminished consciousness. Y ou obtain an MRI (magnetic
resonance image) of her brain and discover a tumor. Y ou place the patient under
general anesthesia, remove the tumor, and a few hours later she’s waking up to the
world again. No more headaches. No more trouble with consciousness. Seemingly
pretty simple.
I adored that simplicity—the absolute honesty and cleanness of science. I respected
that it left no room for fantasy or for sloppy thinking. If a fact could be established as
tangible and trustworthy, it was accepted. If not, then it was rejected.
This approach left very little room for the soul and the spirit, for the continuing
existence of a personality after the brain that supported it stopped functioning. It left
even less room for those words I’d heard in church again and again: “life everlasting.
”
Which is why I counted on my family—on Holley and our boys and my three sisters
and, of course, my mom and dad—so much. In a very real sense, I’d never have been
able to practice my profession—to perform, day in and day out, the actions I
performed, and to see the things I saw—without the bedrock support of love and
understanding they provided.
And that was why Phyllis (after consulting our sister Betsy on the phone) decided
that night to make a promise to me on behalf of our whole family. As she sat there with
my limp, nearly lifeless hand in hers, she told me that no matter what happened from
then on, someone would always be right there, holding my hand.
“We are not letting you go, Eben,
” she said.
“Y ou need an anchor to keep you here,
in this world, where we need you. And we’ll provide it.
”
Little did she know just how important that anchor was going to prove in the days to
come.7.
The Spinning Melody and the Gateway
Something had appeared in the darkness.
Turning slowly, it radiated fine filaments of white-gold light, and as it did so the
darkness around me began to splinter and break apart.
Then I heard a new sound: a living sound, like the richest, most complex, most
beautiful piece of music you’ve ever heard. Growing in volume as a pure white light
descended, it obliterated the monotonous mechanical pounding that, seemingly for eons,
had been my only company up until then.
The light got closer and closer, spinning around and around and generating those
filaments of pure white light that I now saw were tinged, here and there, with hints of
gold.
Then, at the very center of the light, something else appeared. I focused my
awareness, hard, trying to figure out what it was.
An opening. I was no longer looking at the slowly spinning light at all, but through it.
The moment I understood this, I began to move up. Fast. There was a whooshing
sound, and in a flash I went through the opening and found myself in a completely new
world. The strangest, most beautiful world I’d ever seen.
Brilliant, vibrant, ecstatic, stunning . . . I could heap on one adjective after another to
describe what this world looked and felt like, but they’d all fall short. I felt like I was
being born. Not reborn, or born again. Just . . . born.
Below me there was countryside. It was green, lush, and earthlike. It was earth . . .
but at the same time it wasn’t. It was like when your parents take you back to a place
where you spent some years as a very young child. Y ou don’t know the place. Or at
least you think you don’t. But as you look around, something pulls at you, and you
realize that a part of yourself—a part way, deep down—does remember the place after
all, and is rejoicing at being back there again.
I was flying, passing over trees and fields, streams and waterfalls, and here and
there, people. There were children, too, laughing and playing. The people sang and
danced around in circles, and sometimes I’d see a dog, running and jumping among
them, as full of joy as the people were. They wore simple yet beautiful clothes, and it
seemed to me that the colors of these clothes had the same kind of living warmth as the
trees and the flowers that bloomed and blossomed in the countryside around them.
A beautiful, incredible dream world . . .
Except it wasn’t a dream. Though I didn’t know where I was or even what I was, Iwas absolutely sure of one thing: this place I’d suddenly found myself in was
completely real.
The word real expresses something abstract, and it’s frustratingly ineffective at
conveying what I’m trying to describe. Imagine being a kid and going to a movie on a
summer day. Maybe the movie was good, and you were entertained as you sat through
it. But then the show ended, and you filed out of the theater and back into the deep,
vibrant, welcoming warmth of the summer afternoon. And as the air and the sunlight
hit you, you wondered why on earth you’d wasted this gorgeous day sitting in a dark
theater.
Multiply that feeling a thousand times, and you still won’t be anywhere close to what
it felt like where I was.
I don’t know how long, exactly, I flew along. (Time in this place was different from
the simple linear time we experience on earth and is as hopelessly difficult to describe
as every other aspect of it.) But at some point, I realized that I wasn’t alone up there.
Someone was next to me: a beautiful girl with high cheekbones and deep blue eyes.
She was wearing the same kind of peasant-like clothes that the people in the village
down below wore. Golden-brown tresses framed her lovely face. We were riding along
together on an intricately patterned surface, alive with indescribable and vivid colors—
the wing of a butterfly. In fact, millions of butterflies were all around us—vast
fluttering waves of them, dipping down into the greenery and coming back up around
us again. It wasn’t any single, discrete butterfly that appeared, but all of them together,
as if they were a river of life and color, moving through the air. We flew in lazy looped
formations past blossoming flowers and buds on trees that opened as we flew near.
The girl’s outfit was simple, but its colors—powder blue, indigo, and pastel orange-
peach—had the same overwhelming, super-vivid aliveness that everything else in the
surroundings had. She looked at me with a look that, if you saw it for a few moments,
would make your whole life up to that point worth living, no matter what had happened
in it so far. It was not a romantic look. It was not a look of friendship. It was a look
that was somehow beyond all these . . . beyond all the different types of love we have
down here on earth. It was something higher, holding all those other kinds of love
within itself while at the same time being more genuine and pure than all of them.
Without using any words, she spoke to me. The message went through me like a
wind, and I instantly understood that it was true. I knew so in the same way that I
knew that the world around us was real—was not some fantasy, passing and
insubstantial.
The message had three parts, and if I had to translate them into earthly language, I’d
say they ran something like this:
“You are loved and cherished, dearly, forever.
”
“You have nothing to fear.
”“There is nothing you can do wrong.
”
The message flooded me with a vast and crazy sensation of relief. It was like being
handed the rules to a game I’d been playing all my life without ever fully understanding
it.
“We will show you many things here,
” the girl said—again, without actually using
these words but by driving their conceptual essence directly into me.
“But eventually,
you will go back.
”
To this, I had only one question.
Back where?
Remember who’s talking to you right now. I’m not a soft-headed sentimentalist. I
know what death looks like. I know what it feels like to have a living person, whom
you spoke to and joked with in better days, become a lifeless object on an operating
table after you’ve struggled for hours to keep the machine of their body working. I
know what suffering looks like, and the answerless grief on the faces of loved ones
who have lost someone they never dreamed they could lose. I know my biology, and
while I’m not a physicist, I’m no slouch at that, either. I know the difference between
fantasy and reality, and I know that the experience I’m struggling to give you the
vaguest, most completely unsatisfactory picture of, was the single most real experience
of my life.
In fact, the only competition for it in the reality department was what came next.8.
Israel
By eight the next morning, Holley was back in my room. She spelled Phyllis, taking
her place in the chair by the head of my bed and squeezing my still unresponsive hand
in hers. Around 11 A.M., Michael Sullivan arrived, and everyone formed a circle around
me, with Betsy holding my hand so that I was included, too. Michael led a prayer. They
were just finishing when one of the doctors specializing in infectious diseases came in
with a fresh report from downstairs. Despite their adjusting my antibiotics overnight,
my white blood cell count was still rising. The bacteria were continuing, unimpeded,
with the task of eating my brain.
Fast running out of options, the doctors once more went over the details of my
activities in the past few days with Holley. Then they stretched their questions to cover
the past few weeks. Was there anything—anything—in the details of what I’d been
doing that could help them make sense of my condition?
“Well,
” said Holley,
“he did take a work trip to Israel a few months ago.
”
Dr. Brennan looked up from his notepad.
E. coli bacterial cells can swap DNA not only with other E. coli, but with other
gram-negative bacterial organisms as well. This has enormous implications in our time
of global travel, antibiotic bombardment, and fast-mutating new strains of bacterial
illnesses. If some E. coli bacteria find themselves in a harsh biological environment
with some other primitive organisms that are better suited than they are, the E. coli can
potentially pick up some DNA from those better-suited bacteria and incorporate it.
In 1996, doctors discovered a new bacterial strain harboring DNA for a gene coding
for Klebsiella pneumoniae carbapenemase, or KPC, an enzyme that conferred antibiotic
resistance on its host bacterium. It was found in the stomach of a patient who died in a
North Carolina hospital. The strain immediately got the attention of doctors all over the
world when it was discovered that KPC could potentially render a bacteria that
absorbed it resistant not just to some current antibiotics, but to all of them.
If a toxic, antibiotic-proof strain of bacteria (one whose nontoxic cousin is
ubiquitous in our bodies) got loose in the general population, it would have a field day
with the human race. There are no new antibiotics in the ten-year pharmaceutical
development pipeline that could come to the rescue.
Just a few months earlier, Dr. Brennan knew, a patient had checked into a hospital
with a powerful bacterial infection and was given a range of powerful antibiotics in an
effort to control his Klebsiella pneumoniae infection. But the man’s condition continuedto worsen. Tests revealed that he was still suffering from Klebsiella pneumoniae and
that the antibiotics hadn’t done their work. Further tests revealed that the bacteria living
in the man’s large intestine had acquired the KPC gene by direct plasmid transfer from
his resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae infection. In other words, his body had provided
the laboratory for the creation of a species of bacteria that, if it got into the general
population, might rival the Black Death, a plague that killed off half of Europe in the
fourteenth century.
The hospital where all this occurred was the Sourasky Medical Center in Tel A viv,
Israel, and it had occurred just a few months previously. As a matter of fact it
happened at about the time that I’d been there, as part of my work coordinating a global
research initiative in focused ultrasound brain surgery. I’d arrived in Jerusalem at 3:15
A.M. and after finding my hotel had decided on a whim to walk to the old city. I ended
up taking a lone predawn tour of the Via Dolorosa and visiting the alleged site of the
Last Supper. The trip had been strangely moving, and once back in the States I’d often
brought it up with Holley. But at the time I’d known nothing of the patient at the
Sourasky Medical Center, or the bacteria he contracted that picked up the KPC gene.
Bacteria that, it developed, was itself a strain of E. coli.
Could I have somehow picked up an antibiotic-proof KPC-harboring bacteria while I
was over in Israel? It was unlikely. But it was a possible explanation for the apparent
resistance of my infection, and my doctors went to work to determine if that was
indeed the bacteria that was attacking my brain. My case was about to become, for the
first of many reasons, a part of medical history.9.
The Core
Meanwhile, I was in a place of clouds.
Big, puffy, pink-white ones that showed up sharply against the deep blue-black sky.
Higher than the clouds—immeasurably higher—flocks of transparent orbs,
shimmering beings arced across the sky, leaving long, streamer-like lines behind them.
Birds? Angels? These words registered when I was writing down my recollections.
But neither of these words do justice to the beings themselves, which were quite simply
different from anything I have known on this planet. They were more advanced.
Higher.
A sound, huge and booming like a glorious chant, came down from above, and I
wondered if the winged beings were producing it. Again thinking about it later, it
occurred to me that the joy of these creatures, as they soared along, was such that they
had to make this noise—that if the joy didn’t come out of them this way then they
would simply not otherwise be able to contain it. The sound was palpable and almost
material, like a rain that you can feel on your skin but that doesn’t get you wet.
Seeing and hearing were not separate in this place where I now was. I could hear
the visual beauty of the silvery bodies of those scintillating beings above, and I could
see the surging, joyful perfection of what they sang. It seemed that you could not look
at or listen to anything in this world without becoming a part of it—without joining with
it in some mysterious way. Again, from my present perspective, I would suggest that
you couldn’t look at anything in that world at all, for the word at itself implies a
separation that did not exist there. Everything was distinct, yet everything was also a
part of everything else, like the rich and intermingled designs on a Persian carpet . . . or
a butterfly’s wing.
A warm wind blew through, like the kind that spring up on the most perfect summer
days, tossing the leaves of the trees and flowing past like heavenly water. A divine
breeze. It changed everything, shifting the world around me into an even higher octave,
a higher vibration.
Although I still had little language function, at least as we think of it on earth, I began
wordlessly putting questions to this wind—and to the divine being that I sensed at work
behind or within it.
Where is this place?
Who am I?
Why am I here?Each time I silently posed one of these questions, the answer came instantly in an
explosion of light, color, love, and beauty that blew through me like a crashing wave.
What was important about these bursts was that they didn’t simply silence my
questions by overwhelming them. They answered them, but in a way that bypassed
language. Thoughts entered me directly. But it wasn’t thought like we experience on
earth. It wasn’t vague, immaterial, or abstract. These thoughts were solid and
immediate—hotter than fire and wetter than water—and as I received them I was able
to instantly and effortlessly understand concepts that would have taken me years to
fully grasp in my earthly life.
I continued moving forward and found myself entering an immense void, completely
dark, infinite in size, yet also infinitely comforting. Pitch black as it was, it was also
brimming over with light: a light that seemed to come from a brilliant orb that I now
sensed near me. An orb that was living and almost solid, as the songs of the angel
beings had been.
My situation was, strangely enough, something akin to that of a fetus in a womb.
The fetus floats in the womb with the silent partner of the placenta, which nourishes it
and mediates its relationship to the everywhere present yet at the same time invisible
mother. In this case, the “mother” was God, the Creator, the Source who is responsible
for making the universe and all in it. This Being was so close that there seemed to be no
distance at all between God and myself. Y et at the same time, I could sense the infinite
vastness of the Creator, could see how completely minuscule I was by comparison. I
will occasionally use Om as the pronoun for God because I originally used that name in
my writings after my coma.
“Om” was the sound I remembered hearing associated
with that omniscient, omnipotent, and unconditionally loving God, but any descriptive
word falls short.
The pure vastness separating Om and me was, I realized, why I had the Orb as my
companion. In some manner I couldn’t completely comprehend but was sure of
nonetheless, the Orb was a kind of “interpreter” between me and this extraordinary
presence surrounding me.
It was as if I were being born into a larger world, and the universe itself was like a
giant cosmic womb, and the Orb (who remained in some way connected to the Girl on
the Butterfly Wing, who in fact was she) was guiding me through this process.
Later, when I was back here in the world, I found a quotation by the seventeenth-
century Christian poet Henry V aughan that came close to describing this place—this
vast, inky-black core that was the home of the Divine itself.
“There is, some say, in God a deep but dazzling darkness . . .
”
That was it, exactly: an inky darkness that was also full to brimming with light.
The questions, and the answers, continued. Though they still didn’t come in the
form of language as we know it, the “voice” of this Being was warm and—odd as Iknow this may sound—personal. It understood humans, and it possessed the qualities
we possess, only in infinitely greater measure. It knew me deeply and overflowed with
qualities that all my life I’ve always associated with human beings, and human beings
alone: warmth, compassion, pathos . . . even irony and humor.
Through the Orb, Om told me that there is not one universe but many—in fact, more
than I could conceive—but that love lay at the center of them all. Evil was present in all
the other universes as well, but only in the tiniest trace amounts. Evil was necessary
because without it free will was impossible, and without free will there could be no
growth—no forward movement, no chance for us to become what God longed for us
to be. Horrible and all-powerful as evil sometimes seemed to be in a world like ours, in
the larger picture love was overwhelmingly dominant, and it would ultimately be
triumphant.
I saw the abundance of life throughout the countless universes, including some
whose intelligence was advanced far beyond that of humanity. I saw that there are
countless higher dimensions, but that the only way to know these dimensions is to enter
and experience them directly. They cannot be known, or understood, from lower
dimensional space. Cause and effect exist in these higher realms, but outside of our
earthly conception of them. The world of time and space in which we move in this
terrestrial realm is tightly and intricately meshed within these higher worlds. In other
words, these worlds aren’t totally apart from us, because all worlds are part of the
same overarching divine Reality. From those higher worlds one could access any time
or place in our world.
It will take me the rest of my life, and then some, to unpack what I learned up there.
The knowledge given me was not “taught” in the way that a history lesson or math
theorem would be. Insights happened directly, rather than needing to be coaxed and
absorbed. Knowledge was stored without memorization, instantly and for good. It
didn’t fade, like ordinary information does, and to this day I still possess all of it, much
more clearly than I possess the information that I gained over all of my years in school.
That’s not to say that I can get to this knowledge just like that. Because now that
I’m back here in the earthly realm, I have to process it through my limited physical
body and brain. But it’s there. I feel it, laid into my very being. For a person like me
who had spent his whole life working hard to accumulate knowledge and understanding
the old-fashioned way, the discovery of this more advanced level of learning was,
alone, enough to give me food for thought for ages to come . . .
Unfortunately, for my family and my doctors back on earth, the situation was very
different.10.
What Counts
Holley didn’t fail to notice how interested the doctors became when she mentioned
my trip to Israel. But of course she didn’t understand why it was so important. In
retrospect, it was a blessing that she didn’t. Coping with my possible death was burden
enough, without the added possibility that I was the index case for the twenty-first-
century equivalent of the Black Plague.
Meanwhile, more calls went out to friends and family.
Including to my biological family.
As a young boy, I’d worshipped my father, who was chief of staff for twenty years
at Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center in Winston-Salem. I chose academic
neurosurgery as a career in order to follow in his footsteps as closely as I could—
despite knowing I’d never completely fill his shoes.
My father was a deeply spiritual man. He served as a surgeon in the Army Air Force
in the jungles of New Guinea and the Philippines during World War II. He witnessed
brutality and suffering and suffered himself. He told me about nights spent operating on
battle casualties in tents that barely held up under the blankets of monsoon rain hitting
them, the heat and humidity so oppressive that the surgeons stripped down to their
underwear just to be able to endure it.
Dad had married the love of his life (and his commanding officer’s daughter), Betty,
in October 1942, while training for his stint in the Pacific Theater. At war’s end he was
part of the initial group of Allied forces occupying Japan after the United States dropped
atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki. As the only U.S. military neurosurgeon in
Tokyo, he was officially indispensable. He was qualified to perform ear, nose, and
throat surgery to boot.
All of these qualifications ensured that he would not be going anywhere for quite
some time. His new commanding officer would not allow him to go back to the States
until the situation was “more stable.
” Several months after the Japanese formally
surrendered aboard the battleship Missouri in Tokyo Bay, Dad, at last, received general
orders releasing him to go home. However, he knew that the on-site CO would have
these orders rescinded if he saw them. So Dad waited until the weekend, when that CO
was off base for R&R, and processed the orders through the stand-in CO. He was
finally able to board a ship bound for home in December 1945, long after most of his
fellow soldiers had returned to their families.
After coming back to the States in early 1946, Dad went on to finish hisneurosurgical training with his friend and Harvard Medical School classmate, Donald
Matson, who had served in the European Theater. They trained at the Peter Bent
Brigham and the Children’s Hospitals in Boston (flagship hospitals of Harvard Medical
School) under Dr. Franc D. Ingraham, who had been one of the last residents trained
by Dr. Harvey Cushing, globally regarded as the father of modern neurosurgery. In the
1950s and 1960s, the entire cadre of “3131C” neurosurgeons (as they were officially
classified by the Army Air Force), who had honed their craft on the battlefields of
Europe and the Pacific, went on to set the bar for the next half century of
neurosurgeons, including those in my own generation.
My parents grew up during the Depression and were hardwired for work. Dad just
about always made it home for family dinner at 7 P.M., usually in a suit and tie, but
occasionally wearing surgical scrubs. Then he’d return to the hospital, often taking one
of us kids along to do our homework in his office, while he made rounds on his
patients. For Dad, life and work were essentially synonymous, and he raised us
accordingly. He usually made my sisters and me do yard work on Sundays. If we told
him we wanted to go to the movies, he’d reply: “If you go to the movies, then someone
else has to work.
” He was also fiercely competitive. On the squash court, he
considered every game a “battle to the death,
” and even into his eighties was always in
search of fresh opponents, often decades younger.
He was a demanding parent, but also a wonderful one. He treated everyone he met
with respect and carried a screwdriver in the pocket of his lab coat to tighten any loose
screws he might encounter during his rounds of the hospital. His patients, his fellow
physicians, the nurses, and the entire hospital staff loved him. Whether it was operating
on patients, helping to advance research, training neurosurgeons (a singular passsion),
or editing the journal Surgical Neurology (which he did for a number of years), Dad
saw his path in life clearly marked out for him. Even after he finally aged out of the
operating room at seventy-one, he continued to keep up with the latest developments in
the field. After his death in 2004, his long-time partner Dr. David L. Kelly, Jr., wrote,
“Dr. Alexander will always be remembered for his enthusiasm and proficiencies, his
perseverance, and attention to detail, his spirit of compassion, honesty, and excellence
in all that he did.
” No great surprise that I, like so many others, worshipped him.
V ery early on, so far back I don’t even remember when it was, Mom and Dad had
told me that I was adopted (or “chosen,
” as they put it, because, they assured me,
they’d known I was their child from the moment they saw me). They were not my
biological birth parents, but they loved me dearly, as if I were their own flesh and
blood. I grew up knowing that I’d been adopted in April 1954, at the age of four
months, and that my biological mother had been sixteen years old—a sophomore in
high school—unwed when she gave birth to me in 1953. Her boyfriend, a senior with
no immediate prospects for being able to support a child, had agreed to give me up aswell, though neither had wanted to. The knowledge of all this came so early that it was
simply a part of who I was, as accepted and unquestioned as the jet black color of my
hair and the fact that I liked hamburgers and disliked cauliflower. I loved my adoptive
parents just as much as I would have if they had been true blood relations, and they
clearly felt the same about me.
My older sister, Jean, had also been adopted, but five months after they adopted me,
my mother was able to conceive herself. She delivered a baby girl—my sister Betsy—
and five years later, Phyllis, our youngest sister, was born. We were full siblings for all
intents and purposes. I knew that wherever I had come from, I was their brother and
they were my sisters. I grew up in a family that not only loved me but also believed in
me and supported my dreams. Including the dream that seized me in high school and
never let go till I achieved it: to be a neurosurgeon like my father.
I didn’t think about my adoption during my college and medical school years—at
least not on the surface. I did reach out to the Children’s Home Society of North
Carolina several times, inquiring whether or not my mother had any interest in reuniting.
But North Carolina had some of the nation’s strictest laws to protect the anonymity of
adoptees and their birth parents, even if they desperately wanted to reconnect. After my
late twenties, I thought about the matter less and less. And once I met Holley and we
started our own family, the question drifted ever further away.
Or ever deeper inside.
In 1999, when he was twelve and we were still living in Massachusetts, Eben IV got
involved in a family heritage project at the Charles River School where he was a sixth
grader. He knew I’d been adopted, and thus that he had direct relatives on the planet
whom he didn’t know personally, or even by name. The project sparked something in
him—a deep curiosity that he hadn’t, up to that point, known he had.
He asked me if we could seek out my birth parents. I told him that over the years I’d
occasionally looked into the matter myself, contacting the Children’s Home Society of
North Carolina and asking if they had any news. If my biological mom or dad desired
contact, the society would know. But I had never heard anything back.
Not that it bothered me.
“It’s perfectly natural in a circumstance like this,
” I’d told
Eben.
“It doesn’t mean my birth mom doesn’t love me, or that she wouldn’t love you if
she ever set eyes on you. But she doesn’t want to, most likely because she feels like
you and I have our own family and she doesn’t want to get in the way of that.
”
Eben wouldn’t let it go, though, so finally I thought I’d humor him and wrote a
social worker named Betty at the Children’s Home who’d helped me with my requests
before. A few weeks later, on a snowy Friday afternoon in February 2000, Eben IV and
I were driving from Boston up to Maine for a weekend of skiing when I remembered I
was due to give Betty a call to check on her progress. I called her on my cell phone,
and she answered.“Well, in fact,
” she said,
“I do have some news. Are you sitting down?”
I was in fact sitting down, so I said as much, omitting that I was also driving my car
through a blizzard.
“It turns out, Dr. Alexander, that your birth parents actually got married.
”
My heart hammered in my chest, and the road in front of me suddenly turned unreal
and far away. Though I’d known that my parents were sweethearts, I’d always
assumed that once they’d given me up, their lives had taken separate directions.
Instantly a picture appeared in my head. A picture of my birth parents, and of a home
that they’d made somewhere. A home I had never known. A home where—I didn’t
belong.
Betty interrupted my thoughts.
“Dr. Alexander?”
“Yes,
” I said slowly,
“I’m here.
”
“There’s more.
”
To Eben’s puzzlement, I pulled the car over to the side of the road and told her to go
ahead.
“Y our parents had three more children: Two sisters and a brother. I’ve been in touch
with the older sister, and she told me your younger sister died two years ago. Y our
parents are still grieving their loss.
”
“So that means . . . ?” I asked after a long pause, still numb, taking it all in without
really being able to process any of it.
“I’m sorry, Dr. Alexander, but yes—it means she is refusing your request for
contact.
”
Eben shifted in the seat behind me, clearly aware that something of importance had
just happened but stumped as to what it was.
“What is it, Dad?” he asked after I’d hung up.
“Nothing,
” I said.
“The agency still doesn’t know much, but they’re working on it.
Maybe some time later. Maybe . . .
”
But my voice trailed off. Outside, the storm was really picking up. I could only see
about a hundred yards into the low white woods spreading out all around us. I put the
car in gear, squinted carefully into the rearview mirror, and pulled back onto the road.
In an instant, my view of myself had been totally changed. After that phone call I
was, of course, still everything I’d been before: still a scientist, still a doctor, still a
father, still a husband. But I also felt, for the first time ever, like an orphan. Someone
who had been given away. Someone less than fully, 100 percent wanted.
I had never, before that phone call, really thought of myself that way—as someone
cut off from my source. I’d never defined myself in the context of something I had lost
and could never regain. But suddenly it was the only thing about myself I could see.
Over the next few months an ocean of sadness opened up within me: a sadness that
threatened to swamp, and sink, everything in my life I’d worked so hard to create up tothat point.
This was only made worse by my inability to get to the bottom of what was causing
the situation. I’d run into problems in myself before—shortcomings, as I’d seen them
—and I’d corrected them. In med school and in my early days as a surgeon, for
example, I’d been part of a culture where heavy drinking, under the right
circumstances, was smiled upon. But in 1991 I began to notice that I was looking
forward to my day off, and the drinks that went along with it, just a little too eagerly. I
decided that it was time for me to stop drinking alcohol altogether. This was not easy
by any stretch—I’d come to rely on the release provided by those off hours more than
I’d known—and I only made it through those early days of sobriety with my family’s
support. So here was another problem, clearly with only me to blame for it. I had help
to deal with it if I chose to ask. Why couldn’t I nip it in the bud? It just didn’t seem
right that a piece of knowledge about my past—a piece I had no control over
whatsoever—should be able to so completely derail me both emotionally and
professionally.
So I struggled. And I watched in disbelief as my roles as doctor, father, and husband
became ever more difficult to fulfill. Seeing that I was not my best self, Holley set us
up for a course of couples counseling. Though she only partially understood what was
causing it, she forgave me for falling into this ditch of despair and did whatever she
could to pull me up out of it. My depression had ramifications in my work. My parents
were, of course, aware of this change, and though I knew they too forgave it, it killed
me that my career in academic neurosurgery was slumping—and all they could do was
watch from the sidelines. Without my participation, my family was powerless to help
me.
And finally, I watched as this new sadness exposed, then swept away, something
else: my last, half-acknowledged hope that there was some personal element in the
universe—some force beyond the scientific ones I’d spent years studying. In less
clinical terms, it swept away my last belief that there might be a Being of some kind out
there who truly loved and cared about me—and that my prayers might be heard, and
even answered. After that phone call during the blizzard, the notion of a loving, personal
God—my birthright, to some degree, as a churchgoing member of a culture that took
that God with genuine seriousness—vanished completely.
Was there a force or intelligence watching out for all of us? Who cared about
humans in a truly loving way? It was a surprise to have to finally admit that in spite of
all my medical training and experience, I was clearly still keenly, if secretly, interested
in this question, just as I’d been much more interested in the question of my birth
parents than I’d ever realized.
Unfortunately, the answer to the question of whether there was such a Being was
the same as the answer to the question of whether my birth parents would once againopen their lives and their hearts to me.
That answer was no.11.
An End to the Downward Spiral
For much of the next seven years my career, and my family life, continued to suffer.
For a long time the people around me—even those closest to me—weren’t sure what
was causing the problem. But gradually—through remarks I’d make almost in passing
—Holley and my sisters put the pieces together.
Finally, on an early morning walk on a South Carolina beach during a family vacation
in July 2007, Betsy and Phyllis brought up the topic.
“Have you thought about writing
another letter to your birth family?” Phyllis asked.
“Y es,
” Betsy said.
“Things might have changed by now, you never know.
” Betsy
had recently told us she was thinking of adopting a child herself, so I wasn’t totally
surprised that the topic had come up. But all the same, my immediate response—mental
rather than verbal—was: Oh no, not again! I remembered the immense chasm that had
cracked open beneath me after the rejection I’d faced seven years earlier. But I knew
Betsy and Phyllis’s hearts were in the right place. They knew I was suffering, they’d
finally figured out why, and they wanted—rightly—for me to step up and try to fix the
problem. They assured me that they would travel this road with me—that I wouldn’t be
taking this journey alone, as I had done before. We were a team.
So in early August 2007, I wrote an anonymous letter to my birth sister, the keeper
of the gate on the matter, and sent it to Betty at the Children’s Home Society of North
Carolina to forward along:
Dear Sister,
I am interested in communicating with you, our brother and our parents. After
a long talk with my adoptive family sisters and mother about this, their support
and interest rekindled my wanting to know more about my biological family.
My two sons, ages 9 and 19, are interested in their heritage. The three of us
and my wife would be grateful to you for any background information that you
feel comfortable sharing. For me, questions come to mind about my birth parents
regarding their lives in their younger years until now. What interests and
personalities do you all have?
In that we are all growing older, my hopes are to meet them soon. Our
arrangements can be in mutual agreement. Please know that I feel most respectful
of the degree of privacy that they wish to maintain. I have had a wonderful
adoptive family and appreciate my biological parents
’ decision in their youth. Myinterest is genuine and receptive to any boundaries they feel are necessary.
Your consideration in this matter is deeply appreciated.
Most sincerely yours,
Your older Brother
A few weeks later I received a letter from the Children’s Home Society. It was from
my birth sister.
“Y es, we would love to meet you,
” she wrote. North Carolina state law forbade her
from revealing any identifying information to me, but working around those parameters,
she gave me my first real set of clues about the biological family I had never met.
When she reported that my birth father had been a naval aviator in Vietnam, it just
blew me away: no wonder I had always loved to jump out of airplanes and fly
sailplanes. My birth dad was also, I was further stunned to learn, an astronaut trainee
with NASA during the Apollo missions in the mid-1960s (I myself had considered
training as a mission specialist on the space shuttle in 1983). My birth dad later worked
as an airline pilot for Pan Am and Delta.
In October 2007, I finally met my biological parents, Ann and Richard, and my
biological siblings, Kathy and David. Ann told me the full story of how, in 1953, she
spent three months at the Florence Crittenden Home for Unwed Mothers, located next
to Charlotte Memorial Hospital. All of the girls there had code names, and because she
loved American history, my mother chose Virginia Dare—the name of the first baby
born to English settlers in the New World. Most of the girls just called her Dare. At
sixteen, she was the youngest girl there.
She told me that her daddy had been willing to do anything to help her when he
learned of her “predicament.
” He was willing to pick up and move the whole family if
necessary. He had been unemployed for a while, and bringing a new baby into the home
would be a great financial stress, not to mention all the other problems.
A close friend of his had even mentioned a doctor he knew of down in Dillon, South
Carolina, who could “fix things.
” But her mother wouldn’t hear of that.
Ann told me how she had looked up at the stars twinkling wildly in the gusty winds
of a newly arrived cold front on that frigid December night in 1953—how she had
walked across the empty streets under scattered low, racing clouds. She had wanted
this time to be alone, with just the moon and stars and her soon-to-be-born child—me.
“The crescent moon hung low in the west. Brilliant Jupiter was just rising, to watch
over us all night. Richard loved science and astronomy, and he later told me that Jupiter
was at opposition that night, and would not be as bright again for almost nine years.
Over that time, much would happen in our lives, including the births of two more
children.
“But at the time I just thought how beautiful and bright the King of Planets appeared,watching over us from above.
”
As she entered the hospital foyer, a magical thought struck her. Girls generally
stayed in the Crittenden Home for two weeks after they delivered their babies, then
they’d go home and pick up their lives where they’d left off. If she really delivered that
night, she and I might be home for Christmas—if they actually set her free at two
weeks. What a perfect miracle that would be: to bring me home by Christmas Day.
“Dr. Crawford was fresh from another delivery, and he looked awfully tired,
” Ann
told me. He laid an ether-soaked gauze over her face to ease the pain, so she was only
semiconscious when finally, at 2:42 A.M., with one last great push, she gave birth to her
first child.
Ann told me that she wanted so much to hold and caress me, and that she would
never forget hearing my cries until fatigue and that anesthetic finally won out.
Over the next four hours, first Mars, then Saturn, then Mercury, and finally brilliant
V enus rose in the eastern sky to greet me into this world. Meanwhile, Ann slept more
deeply than she had in months.
The nurse awakened her before sunrise.
“I have someone I want you to meet,
” she said cheerfully, and presented me,
swaddled in a sky-blue blanket, for her to admire.
“The nurses all agreed that you were the most beautiful baby in the whole nursery. I
was bursting with pride.
”
As much as Ann wanted to keep me, the cold reality that she couldn’t soon sank in.
Richard had dreams of going to college, but those dreams would not keep me fed.
Perhaps I felt Ann’s pain, because I stopped eating. At eleven days, I was hospitalized
with the diagnosis that I was “failing to thrive,
” and my first Christmas and the
following nine days were spent in the hospital in Charlotte.
After I was admitted to the hospital, Ann took the two-hour bus ride north to her
small hometown. She spent that Christmas with her parents, sisters, and friends, whom
she had not seen in three months. All without me.
By the time I was eating again, my separate life was under way. Ann sensed that she
was losing control and that they weren’t going to allow her to keep me. When she
called the hospital just after New Y ear’s, she was told that I had been sent to the
Children’s Home Society in Greensboro.
“Sent with a volunteer? How unfair!” she said.
I spent the next three months living in a baby dorm with several other infants whose
mothers could not keep them. My crib was on the second floor of a bluish gray
Victorian home that had been donated to the society.
“It was a most pleasant place for
your first home,
” Ann told me with a laugh,
“even though it was mainly a baby dorm.
”
Ann took the three-hour bus ride to visit half a dozen times over the next few months,
trying desperately to come up with a plan that would succeed in keeping me with her.Once she came with her mother and another time with Richard (although the nurses
made him view me through the window—they would not let him in the same room, and
certainly not let him hold me).
But by late March 1954, it was clear that things weren’t going to go her way. She
would have to give me up. She and her mother took the bus to Greensboro one last
time.
“I had to hold you and look in your eyes and try to explain it all to you,
” Ann told
me.
“I knew you would just giggle and coo, blow baby bubbles, and make pleasing
sounds no matter what I said, but I felt I owed you an explanation. I held you closely
one last time, kissed your ears, chest, and face, and caressed you gently. I remember
inhaling deeply, loving that wonderful aroma of freshly bathed baby, as if it were
yesterday.
“I called you by your birth name and said,
‘I love you so much, so much you’ll
never know. And I’ll love you forever, until the day I die.
’
“I said,
‘God, please let him know how much he is loved. That I love him, and
always will.
’ But I had no way of knowing if my prayer would be answered. Adoption
arrangements in the 1950s were final and very secret. No turning back, no
explanations. Sometimes birth dates were changed in the records just to hamper
anyone’s efforts to uncover the truth about a baby’s origins. Leave nothing to trace.
Agreements were protected by harsh state laws. The rule was to forget it ever
happened and go on with the rest of your life. And, hopefully, learn from it.
“I kissed you one last time, then laid you gently in your crib. I wrapped you in your
little blue blanket, took one last look into your blue eyes, then kissed my finger and
touched it to your forehead.
“‘Goodbye, Richard Michael. I love you,
’ were my last words to you, at least for
half a century or so.
”
Ann went on to tell me that after she and Richard were married and the rest of their
children came along, she became more and more taken up with finding out what had
become of me. In addition to being a naval aviator and an airline pilot, Richard was an
attorney, and Ann figured that gave him license to uncover my adoptive identity. But
Richard was too much of a gentleman to go back on the adoption agreement made in
1954, and he kept out of the matter. In the early 1970s, with the war in Vietnam still
raging, Ann couldn’t get the date of my birth out of her head. I would turn nineteen in
December 1972. Would I go over? If so, what would become of me there? Early on,
my plan was to enlist in the marines to fly. My vision was 20/100, and the Air Force
required 20/20 without correction. Word on the street was that the marines would take
even those of us with 20/100 vision and teach us to fly. However, they then started
winding down the Vietnam war effort, so I never enlisted. I headed off to med school
instead. But Ann knew none of this. In the spring of 1973, they watched as survivingPOWs from the “Hanoi Hilton” disembarked from the planes returning from North
Vietnam. They were heartbroken when missing pilots they knew, more than half of
Richard’s navy class, failed to emerge from the planes, and Ann got it in her head that I
might have been killed over there myself.
Once in her mind the image refused to fade, and for years she was convinced that
I’d died a grisly death in the rice paddies of Vietnam. She certainly would have been
surprised to know that at that time I was just a few miles away from her in Chapel Hill!
In the summer of 2008, I met up with my biological father, his brother Bob, and his
brother-in-law, also named Bob, at Litchfield Beach, South Carolina. Brother Bob was a
decorated hero in the navy during the Korean War and a test pilot at China Lake (the
navy’s weapons test center in the California desert, where he perfected the Sidewinder
missile system and flew F-104 Starfighters). Meanwhile Richard’s brother-in-law Bob
set a speed record during Operation Sun Run in 1957, a circumglobal relay record in F-
101 V oodoo jet fighters “outflying the sun” by circling the earth at an average speed of
over 1,000 miles per hour.
It felt like Old Home Week for me.
Those meetings with my birth parents heralded the end of what I’ve come to think
of as my Y ears of Not Knowing. Y ears that, I came at last to learn, had been
characterized by the same terrible pain for my birthparents as they had been for me.
There was only one wound that wouldn’t heal: the loss, ten years earlier in 1998, of
my biological sister Betsy (yes, the same name as one of the sisters in my adoptive
family, and they both married Robs, but that’s another story). She’d had a big heart,
everyone told me, and, when not working at the rape crisis center where she spent
most of her time, she could usually be found feeding and caring for a menagerie of
stray dogs and cats.
“A real angel,
” Ann called her. Kathy promised to send me a
picture of her. Betsy had struggled with alcohol just as I had, and learning of her loss,
fueled in part by those struggles, made me realize once again how fortunate I had been
in resolving my own problem. I longed to meet Betsy, to comfort her—to tell her that
wounds could heal, and that all would be okay.
Because, strangely enough, meeting my birth family was the first time in my life that
I felt that things really were, somehow, okay. Family mattered, and I’d gotten mine—
most of mine—back. This was my first real education in how profoundly knowledge of
one’s origins can heal a person’s life in unexpected ways. Knowing where I came
from, my biological origins, allowed me to see, and to accept, things in myself that I’d
never dreamed I’d have been able to. Through meeting them, I was allowed to throw
away, at last, the nagging suspicion that I’d carried around without even being aware of
it: a suspicion that, wherever I had come from, biologically speaking, I had not been
loved or cared about. Subconsciously, I had believed that I didn
’t deserve to be loved,
or even to exist. Discovering that I had been loved, since the very beginning, began toheal me in the most profound way imaginable. I felt a wholeness I had never known
before.
It was not, however, the only discovery in this area that I would make. The other
question that I thought had been answered in the car with Eben that day—the question
of whether there really is a loving God out there—still held, and the answer in my mind
was still no.
It wasn’t until I spent seven days in coma that I revisited that question. I discovered
an entirely unexpected answer there as well . . .12.
The Core
Something pulled at me. Not like someone grabbing my arm, but something subtler,
less physical. It was a little like when the sun dips behind a cloud and you feel your
mood change instantly in response.
I was going back, away from the Core. Its inky-bright darkness faded into the green
landscape of the Gateway, with all of its dazzling landscape. Looking down, I saw the
villagers again, the trees and sparkling streams and the waterfalls, as well as the arcing
angel-beings above.
My companion was there, too. She had been there the whole time, of course, all
through my journey into the Core, in the form of that orblike ball of light. But now she
was, once again, in human form. She wore the same beautiful dress, and seeing her
again made me feel like a child lost in a huge and alien city who suddenly comes upon a
familiar face. What a gift she was! “We will show you many things, but you will be
going back.
” That message, delivered wordlessly to me at the entrance to the trackless
darkness of the Core, came back to me now. I also now understood where “back”
was.
The Realm of the Earthworm’s-Eye View where I had started this odyssey.
But it was different this time. Moving down into the darkness with the full
knowledge of what lay above it, I no longer experienced the trepidation that I had when
I was originally there. As the glorious music of the Gateway faded out and the pulse-
like pounding of the lower realm returned, I heard and saw these things as an adult sees
a place where he or she had once been frightened but is no longer afraid. The murk and
darkness, the faces that bubbled up and faded away, the artery-like roots that came
down from above, held no terror for me now, because I understood—in the wordless
way I understood everything then—that I was no longer of this place, but only visiting
it.
But why was I visiting it again?
The answer came to me in the same instantaneous, nonverbal way that the answers
in the brilliant world above had been delivered. This whole adventure, it began to occur
to me, was some kind of tour—some kind of grand overview of the invisible, spiritual
side of existence. And like all good tours, it included all floors and all levels.
Once I was back in the lower realm, the vagaries of time in these worlds beyond
what I knew of this earth continued to hold. To get a little—if only a very little—idea of
what this feels like, ponder how time lays itself out in dreams. In a dream,
“before” and“after” become tricky designations. Y ou can be in one part of the dream and know
what’s coming, even if you haven’t experienced it yet. My “time” out beyond was
something like that—though I should also underline that what happened to me had none
of the murky confusion of our earthbound dreams, except at the very earliest stages,
when I was still in the underworld.
How long was I there this time? Again I have no real idea—no way to gauge it. But I
do know that after returning to the lower realm, it took a long time to discover that I
actually had some control over my course—that I was no longer trapped in this lower
world. With concerted effort, I could move back up to the higher planes. At a certain
point in the murky depths, I found myself wishing for the Spinning Melody to return.
After an initial struggle to recall the notes, the gorgeous music, and the spinning ball of
light emitting it blossomed into my awareness. They cut, once again, through the jellied
muck, and I began to rise.
In the worlds above, I slowly discovered, to know and be able to think of something
is all one needs in order to move toward it. To think of the Spinning Melody was to
make it appear, and to long for the higher worlds was to bring myself there. The more
familiar I became with the world above, the easier it was to return to it. During my time
out of my body, I accomplished this back-and-forth movement from the muddy
darkness of the Realm of the Earthworm’s-Eye View to the green brilliance of the
Gateway and into the black but holy darkness of the Core any number of times. How
many I can’t say exactly—again because time as it was there just doesn’t translate to
our conception of time here on earth. But each time I reached the Core, I went deeper
than before, and was taught more, in the wordless, more-than-verbal way that all things
are communicated in the worlds above this one.
That doesn’t mean that I saw anything like the whole universe, either in my original
journey from the Earthworm’s-Eye View up to the Core, or in the ones that came
afterward. In fact, one of the truths driven home to me in the Core each time I returned
to it was how impossible it would be to understand all that exists—either its
physical/visible side or its (much, much larger) spiritual/invisible side, not to mention
the countless other universes that exist or have ever existed.
But none of that mattered, because I had already been taught the one thing—the only
thing—that, in the last analysis, truly matters. I had initially received this piece of
knowledge from my lovely companion on the butterfly wing upon my first entrance
into the Gateway. It came in three parts, and to take one more shot at putting it into
words (because of course it was initially delivered wordlessly), it would run something
like this:
You are loved and cherished.
You have nothing to fear.
There is nothing you can do wrong.If I had to boil this entire message down to one sentence, it would run this way:
You are loved.
And if I had to boil it down further, to just one word, it would (of course) be,
simply:
Love.
Love is, without a doubt, the basis of everything. Not some abstract, hard-to-fathom
kind of love but the day-to-day kind that everyone knows—the kind of love we feel
when we look at our spouse and our children, or even our animals. In its purest and
most powerful form, this love is not jealous or selfish, but unconditional. This is the
reality of realities, the incomprehensibly glorious truth of truths that lives and breathes
at the core of everything that exists or that ever will exist, and no remotely accurate
understanding of who and what we are can be achieved by anyone who does not know
it, and embody it in all of their actions.
Not much of a scientific insight? Well, I beg to differ. I’m back from that place, and
nothing could convince me that this is not only the single most important emotional
truth in the universe, but also the single most important scientific truth as well.
I’ve been talking about my experience, as well as meeting other people who study or
have undergone near-death experiences, for several years now. I know that the term
unconditional love gets bandied around a lot in those circles. How many of us can
grasp what that truly means?
I know, of course, why the term comes up as much as it does. It’s because many,
many other people have seen and experienced what I did. But like me, when these
people come back to the earthly level, they’re stuck with words, and words alone, to
convey experiences and insights that lie completely beyond the power of words. It’s
like trying to write a novel with only half the alphabet.
The primary hurdle that most NDE subjects must jump is not how to reacclimate to
the limitations of the earthly world—though this can certainly be a challenge—but how
to convey what the love they experienced out there actually feels like.
Deep down, we already know. Just as Dorothy in The Wizard of Oz always had the
capability to return home, we have the ability to recover our connection with that idyllic
realm. We just forget that we do, because during the brain-based, physical portion of
our existence, our brain blocks out, or veils, that larger cosmic background, just as the
sun’s light blocks the stars from view each morning. Imagine how limited our view of
the universe would be if we never saw the star-spangled nighttime sky.
We can only see what our brain’s filter allows through. The brain—in particular its
left-side linguistic/logical part, that which generates our sense of rationality and the
feeling of being a sharply defined ego or self—is a barrier to our higher knowledge and
experience.
It is my belief that we are now facing a crucial time in our existence. We need torecover more of that larger knowledge while living here on earth, while our brains
(including its left-side analytical parts) are fully functioning. Science—the science to
which I’ve devoted so much of my life—doesn’t contradict what I learned up there.
But far, far too many people believe it does, because certain members of the scientific
community, who are pledged to the materialist worldview, have insisted again and again
that science and spirituality cannot coexist.
They are mistaken. Making this ancient but ultimately basic fact more widely known
is why I have written this book, and it renders all the other aspects of my story—the
mystery of how I contracted my illness, of how I managed to be conscious in another
dimension for the week of my coma, and how I somehow recovered so completely—
entirely secondary.
The unconditional love and acceptance that I experienced on my journey is the single
most important discovery I have ever made, or will ever make, and as hard as I know
it’s going to be to unpack the other lessons I learned while there, I also know in my
heart that sharing this very basic message—one so simple that most children readily
accept it—is the most important task I have.13.
Wednesday
For two days,
“Wednesday” had been the buzzword—the day on my doctors’ lips
when it came to describing my chances. As in: “We hope to see some improvement by
Wednesday.
” And now here Wednesday was, without so much as a glimmer of change
in my condition.
“When can I see Dad?”
This question—the natural one for a ten-year-old whose father is in the hospital—
had been coming from Bond regularly since I had gone into a coma on Monday. Holley
had been fending it off successfully for two days, but on Wednesday morning, she
decided it was time to address it.
When Holley had told Bond, on Monday night, that I wasn’t home from the hospital
yet because I was “sick,
” he conjured what that word had always meant to him, up to
this point in his ten years of life: a cough, a sore throat—maybe a headache. Granted,
his appreciation of just how much a headache can actually hurt had been greatly
expanded by what he’d seen on Monday morning. But when Holley finally brought him
to the hospital that Wednesday afternoon, he was still hoping to be greeted by
something very different from what he saw in my hospital bed.
Bond saw a body that already bore only a distant resemblance to what he knew as
his father. When someone is sleeping, you can look at them and tell there’s still a
person inhabiting the body. There’s a presence. But most doctors will tell you it’s
different when a person is in a coma (even if they can’t tell you exactly why). The
body is there, but there’s a strange, almost physical sensation that the person is
missing. That their essence, inexplicably, is somewhere else.
Eben IV and Bond had always been very close, ever since Eben ran into the delivery
suite when Bond was only minutes old to hug his brand new brother. Eben met Bond at
the hospital that third day of my coma and did what he could to frame the situation
positively for his younger brother. And, being hardly more than a boy himself, he came
up with a scenario he thought Bond would be able to appreciate: a battle.
“Let’s make a picture of what’s going on so Dad will see it when he gets better,
” he
said to Bond.
So on a table in the hospital dining area, they laid out a big sheet of orange paper and
drew a representation of what was happening inside my comatose body. They drew my
white blood cells, wearing capes and armed with swords, defending the besieged
territory of my brain. And, armed with their own swords and slightly differentuniforms, they drew the invading E. coli. There was hand-to-hand combat, and the
bodies of the slain on both sides were scattered about.
It was an accurate enough representation, in its way. The only thing about it that
was inaccurate, taking into account the simplification of the obviously more complex
event going on inside my body, was the way the battle was going. In Eben and Bond’s
rendition, the battle was pitched and at a white heat, with both sides struggling and the
outcome uncertain—though, of course, the white blood cells would eventually win. But
as he sat with Bond, colored markers spread out on the table, trying to share in this
naïve version of events, Eben knew that in truth, the battle was no longer pitched, or so
uncertain.
And he knew which side was winning.14.
A Special Kind of NDE
The true value of a human being is determined primarily by the measure and the
sense in which he has attained liberation from the self.
—ALBERT EINSTEIN (1879–1955)
When I was initially in the Realm of the Earthworm’s-Eye View, I had no real center
of consciousness. I didn’t know who or what I was, or even if I was. I was
simply . . . there, a singular awareness in the midst of a soupy, dark, muddy
nothingness that had no beginning and, seemingly, no end.
Now, however, I knew. I understood that I was part of the Divine and that nothing
—absolutely nothing—could ever take that away. The (false) suspicion that we can
somehow be separated from God is the root of every form of anxiety in the universe,
and the cure for it—which I received partially within the Gateway and completely
within the Core—was the knowledge that nothing can tear us from God, ever. This
knowledge—and it remains the single most important thing I’ve ever learned—robbed
the Realm of the Earthworm’s-Eye View of its terror and allowed me to see it for what
it really was: a not entirely pleasant, but no doubt necessary, part of the cosmos.
Many people have traveled to the realms I did, but, strangely enough, most
remembered their earthly identities while away from their earthly forms. They knew
that they were John Smith or George Johnson or Sarah Brown. They never lost sight of
the fact that they lived on earth. They were aware that their living relatives were still
there, waiting and hoping they would come back. They also, in many cases, met
friends and relatives who had died before them, and in these cases, too, they recognized
those people instantly.
Many NDE subjects have reported engaging in life reviews, in which they saw their
interactions with various people and their good or bad actions during the course of their
lives.
I experienced none of these events, and taken all together they demonstrate the single
most unusual aspect of my NDE. I was completely free of my bodily identity for all of
it, so that any classic NDE occurrence that might have involved my remembering who
I was on earth was rigorously missing.
To say that at that point in the proceedings I still had no idea who I was or where
I’d come from sounds somewhat perplexing, I know. After all, how could I be learningall these stunningly complex and beautiful things, how could I see the girl next to me,
and the blossoming trees and waterfalls and villagers, and still not know that it was I,
Eben Alexander, who was the one experiencing them? How could I understand all that I
did, yet not realize that on earth I was a doctor, husband, and father? A person who
was not seeing trees and rivers and clouds for the first time when I entered the
Gateway, but one who had seen more than his share of them as a child growing up in
the very concrete and earthly locale of Winston-Salem, North Carolina?
My best shot at an answer is to suggest that I was in a position similar to that of
someone with partial but beneficial amnesia. That is, a person who has forgotten some
key aspect about him or herself, but who benefits through having forgotten it, even if
for only a short while.
How did I gain from not remembering my earthly self? It allowed me to go deep into
realms beyond the worldly without having to worry about what I was leaving behind.
Throughout my entire time in those worlds, I was a soul with nothing to lose. No
places to miss, no people to mourn. I had come from nowhere and had no history, so I
fully accepted my circumstances—even the initial murk and mess of the Realm of the
Earthworm’s-Eye View—with equanimity.
And because I so completely forgot my mortal identity, I was granted full access to
the true cosmic being I really am (and we all are). Once again, in some ways my
experience was analogous to a dream, in which you remember some things about
yourself while forgetting other things completely. But again this is only a partially useful
analogy, because, as I keep stressing, the Gateway and the Core were not remotely
dreamlike but ultra-real—as far from illusory as one can be. To use the word removed
makes it sound as if the absence of my earthly memories while in the Realm of the
Earthworm’s-Eye View, the Gateway, and the Core was in some manner intentional. I
now suspect that this was the case. At the risk of oversimplifying, I was allowed to die
harder, and travel deeper, than almost all NDE subjects before me.
As arrogant as that might sound, my intentions are not. The rich literature on NDEs
has proved crucial to understanding my own journey in coma. I can’t claim to know
why I had the experience I had, but I do know now (three years later), from reading
other NDE literature, that the penetration of the higher worlds tends to be a gradual
process and requires that the individual release his or her attachments to whatever level
he or she is on before going higher or deeper.
That was not a problem for me, because throughout my experience I had no earthly
memories whatsoever, and the only pain and heartache I felt was when I had to return
to earth, where I’d begun.15.
The Gift of Forgetting
We must believe in free will. We have no choice.
—ISAAC B. S INGER (1902–1991)
The view of human consciousness held by most scientists today is that it is composed
of digital information—data, that is, of essentially the same kind used by computers.
Though some bits of this data—seeing a spectacular sunset, hearing a beautiful
symphony for the first time, even falling in love—may feel more profound or special to
us than the countless other bits of information created and stored in our brains, this is
really just an illusion. All bits are, in fact, qualitatively the same. Our brains model
outside reality by taking the information that comes in through our senses and
transforming it into a rich digital tapestry. But our perceptions are just a model—not
reality itself. An illusion.
This was, of course, the view I held as well. I can remember being in medical
school and occasionally hearing arguments that consciousness is nothing more than a
very complex computer program. These arguments suggested that the ten billion or so
neurons firing constantly within our brains are capable of producing a lifetime of
consciousness and memory.
To understand how the brain might actually block our access to knowledge of the
higher worlds, we need to accept—at least hypothetically and for the moment—that the
brain itself doesn’t produce consciousness. That it is, instead, a kind of reducing valve
or filter, shifting the larger, nonphysical consciousness that we possess in the
nonphysical worlds down into a more limited capacity for the duration of our mortal
lives. There is, from the earthly perspective, a very definite advantage to this. Just as
our brains work hard every moment of our waking lives to filter out the barrage of
sensory information coming at us from our physical surroundings, selecting the
material we actually need in order to survive, so it is that forgetting our trans-earthly
identities also allows us to be “here and now” far more effectively. Just as most of
ordinary life holds too much information for us to take in at once and still get anything
done, being excessively conscious of the worlds beyond the here and now would slow
down our progress even more. If we knew too much of the spiritual realm now, then
navigating our lives on earth would be an even greater challenge than it already is.
(That’s not to say we shouldn’t be conscious of the worlds beyond now—only that ifwe are extra-conscious of their grandeur and immensity, they can prevent action while
still here on earth.) From a more purpose-focused perspective (and I now believe the
universe is nothing if not purposeful), making the right decisions through our free will
in the face of the evil and injustice on earth would mean far less if we remembered,
while here, the full beauty and brilliance of what awaits us.
Why am I so sure of all this? For two reasons. The first is that I was shown it (by
the beings who taught me when I was in the Gateway and the Core), and the second is
because I actually experienced it. While beyond my body, I received knowledge about
the nature and structure of the universe that was vastly beyond my comprehension. But
I received it anyhow, in large part because, with my worldly preoccupations out of the
way, I had room to do so. Now that I’m back on earth and remember my bodily
identity, the seed of that trans-earthly knowledge has once again been covered over.
And yet it’s still there. I can feel it, at every moment. It will take years, in this earthly
environment, to come to fruition. That is, it will take me years to understand, using my
mortal, material brain, what I understood so instantly and easily in the brain-free realms
of the world beyond. Y et I’m confident that with hard work on my part, much of that
knowledge will continue to unfold.
To say that there is still a chasm between our current scientific understanding of the
universe and the truth as I saw it is a considerable understatement. I still love physics
and cosmology, still love studying our vast and wonderful universe. Only I now have a
greatly enlarged conception of what “vast” and “wonderful” really mean. The physical
side of the universe is as a speck of dust compared to the invisible and spiritual part. In
my past view, spiritual wasn’t a word that I would have employed during a scientific
conversation. Now I believe it is a word that we cannot afford to leave out.
From the Core, my understanding of what we call “dark energy” and “dark matter”
seemed to have clear explanations, as did far more advanced components of the
makeup of our universe that humans won’t address for ages.
This doesn’t mean, however, that I can explain them to you. That’s because—
paradoxically—I am still in the process of understanding them myself. Perhaps the best
way of conveying that part of the experience is to say that I had a foretaste of another,
larger kind of knowledge: one I believe human beings will be able to access in ever
larger numbers in the future. But conveying that knowledge now is rather like being a
chimpanzee, becoming a human for a single day to experience all of the wonders of
human knowledge, and then returning to one’s chimp friends and trying to tell them
what it was like knowing several different Romance languages, the calculus, and the
immense scale of the universe.
Up there, a question would arise in my mind, and the answer would arise at the same
time, like a flower coming up right next to it. It was almost as if, just as no physical
particle in the universe is really separate from another, so in the same way there was nosuch thing as a question without an accompanying answer. These answers were not
simple “yes” or “no” fare, either. They were vast conceptual edifices, staggering
structures of living thought, as intricate as cities. Ideas so vast they would have taken
me lifetimes to find my way around if I had been confined to earthly thought. But I
wasn’t. I had sloughed off that earthly style of thought like a butterfly breaking from a
chrysalis.
I saw the earth as a pale blue dot in the immense blackness of physical space. I
could see that earth was a place where good and evil mixed, and that this constituted
one of its unique features. Even on earth there is much more good than evil, but earth is
a place where evil is allowed to gain influence in a way that would be entirely
impossible at higher levels of existence. That evil could occasionally have the upper
hand was known and allowed by the Creator as a necessary consequence of giving the
gift of free will to beings like us.
Small particles of evil were scattered throughout the universe, but the sum total of all
that evil was as a grain of sand on a vast beach compared to the goodness, abundance,
hope, and unconditional love in which the universe was literally awash. The very fabric
of the alternate dimension is love and acceptance, and anything that does not have these
qualities appears immediately and obviously out of place there.
But free will comes at the cost of a loss or falling-away from this love and
acceptance. We are free; but we are free beings hemmed all around by an environment
conspiring to make us feel that we are not free. Free will is of central importance for
our function in the earthly realm: a function that, we will all one day discover, serves
the much higher role of allowing our ascendance in the timeless alternate dimension.
Our life down here may seem insignificant, for it is minute in relation to the other lives
and other worlds that also crowd the invisible and visible universes. But it is also hugely
important, for our role here is to grow toward the Divine, and that growth is closely
watched by the beings in the worlds above—the souls and lucent orbs (those beings I
saw originally far above me in the Gateway, and which I believe are the origin of our
culture’s concept of angels).
We—the spiritual beings currently inhabiting our evolutionarily developed mortal
brains and bodies, the product of the earth and the exigencies of the earth—make the
real choices. True thought is not the brain’s affair. But we have—in part by the brain
itself—been so trained to associate our brains with what we think and who we are that
we have lost the ability to realize that we are at all times much more than the physical
brains and bodies that do—or should do—our bidding.
True thought is pre-physical. This is the thinking-behind-the-thinking responsible for
all the genuinely consequential choices we make in the world. A thinking that is not
dependent on linear deduction, but that moves fast as lightning, making connections on
different levels, bringing them together. In the face of this free, inner intelligence, ourordinary thought is hopelessly slow and fumbling. It’s this thinking that catches the
football in the end zone, that comes up with the inspired scientific insight or writes the
inspired song. The subliminal thinking that is always there, when we really need it, but
that we have all too often lost the ability both to access and to believe in. Needless to
say, it’s the thinking that sprang into action the evening of that skydive when Chuck’s
chute opened up suddenly beneath me.
To experience thinking outside the brain is to enter a world of instantaneous
connections that make ordinary thinking (i.e., those aspects limited by the physical
brain and the speed of light) seem like some hopelessly sleepy and plodding event. Our
truest, deepest self is completely free. It is not crippled or compromised by past actions
or concerned with identity or status. It comprehends that it has no need to fear the
earthly world, and therefore, it has no need to build itself up through fame or wealth or
conquest.
This is the true spiritual self that all of us are destined someday to recover. But until
that day comes, I feel, we should do everything in our power to get in touch with this
miraculous aspect of ourselves—to cultivate it and bring it to light. This is the being
living within all of us right now and that is, in fact, the being that God truly intends us
to be.
How do we get closer to this genuine spiritual self? By manifesting love and
compassion. Why? Because love and compassion are far more than the abstractions
many of us believe them to be. They are real. They are concrete. And they make up the
very fabric of the spiritual realm.
In order to return to that realm, we must once again become like that realm, even
while we are stuck in, and plodding through, this one.
One of the biggest mistakes people make when they think about God is to imagine
God as impersonal. Y es, God is behind the numbers, the perfection of the universe that
science measures and struggles to understand. But—again, paradoxically—Om is
“human” as well—even more human than you and I are. Om understands and
sympathizes with our human situation more profoundly and personally than we can
even imagine because Om knows what we have forgotten, and understands the terrible
burden it is to live with amnesia of the Divine for even a moment.16.
The Well
Holley first met our friend Sylvia in the 1980s, when both were teaching at the
Ravenscroft School in Raleigh, North Carolina. While there, Holley was also a close
friend of Susan Reintjes. Susan is an intuitive—a fact that never got in the way of my
feelings about her. She was, to my mind, a very special person, even if what she did
was, to say the least, outside my straight-and-narrow neurosurgical view. She was also
a channel and had written a book called Third Eye Open, which Holley was a big fan
of. One of the spiritual healing activities Susan regularly performed involved helping
coma patients to heal by contacting them psychically. On Thursday, my fourth day in
coma, Sylvia had the idea that Susan should try to contact me.
Sylvia called her at home in Chapel Hill and explained what was happening with me.
Would it be possible for her to “tune in” to me? Susan said yes and asked for a few
details about my illness. Sylvia gave her the basics: I’d been in a coma for four days
and I was in critical condition.
“That’s all I need to know,
” Susan said.
“I’ll try to contact him tonight.
”
According to Susan’s view, a coma patient was a kind of in-between being. Neither
completely here (the earthly realm) nor completely there (the spiritual realm), these
patients often have a singularly mysterious atmosphere to them. This was, as I’ve
mentioned, a phenomenon I’d noticed myself many times, though of course I’d never
given it the supernatural credence that Susan had.
In Susan’s experience, one of the qualities that set coma patients apart was their
receptivity to telepathic communication. She was confident that once she’d put herself
into a meditative state, she’d soon establish contact with me.
“Communicating with a coma patient,
” she later told me,
“is a little like throwing a
rope down a deep well. How deep the rope needs to go depends on the depth of the
comatose state. When I tried to contact you, the first thing that surprised me was how
deep the rope went. The farther down, the more frightened I became that you were too
far away—that I wouldn’t be able to reach you because you weren’t coming back.
”
After five full minutes of mentally descending via the telepathic “rope,
” she felt a
slight shift, like a fishing line deep down in the water getting a small but definite tug.
“I was sure it was you,
” she told me later,
“and I told Holley as much. I told her it
wasn’t your time yet, and that your body would know what to do. I suggested that
Holley keep those two thoughts in mind, and repeat them to you at your bedside.
”17.
N of 1
It was Thursday when my doctors determined that my particular strain of E. coli
didn’t match the ultraresistant strain that, unaccountably, had shown up in Israel just at
the time I’d been there. But the fact that it didn’t match only made my case more
confounding. While it was certainly good news that I was not harboring a strain of
bacteria that could wipe out a third of the country, in terms of my own, individual
recovery, it just underscored what my doctors were already suspecting all too clearly:
that my case was essentially without precedent.
It was also quickly moving from desperate to hopeless. The doctors simply didn’t
have an answer for how I could have contracted my illness, or how I could be brought
back from my coma. They were sure of only one thing: they did not know of anyone
making a full recovery from bacterial meningitis after being comatose for more than a
few days. We were now into day four.
The stress took its toll on everyone. Phyllis and Betsy had decided on Tuesday that
any talk of the possibility of my dying would be forbidden in my presence, under the
assumption that some part of me might be aware of the discussion. Early Thursday
morning, Jean asked one of the nurses in the ICU room about my chances of survival.
Betsy, on the other side of my bed, heard her and said: “Please don’t have that
conversation in this room.
”
Jean and I had always been extremely close. We were part of the family just like our
“homegrown” siblings, but the fact that we were “chosen” by mom and dad, as they
put it, inevitably gave us a special bond. She had always watched out for me, and her
frustration at her powerlessness over the current situation brought her close to a
breaking point.
Tears came to Jean’s eyes.
“I need to go home for a while,
” she said.
After determining that there were plenty of people to continue my bedside vigil, all
agreed that the nursing staff would probably be delighted to have one less person in my
room.
Jean went back to our home, packed her bags, and drove home to Delaware that
afternoon. By leaving, she gave the first real outward expression to an emotion the
whole family was starting to feel: powerlessness. There are few experiences more
frustrating than seeing a loved one in a comatose state. Y ou want to help, but you
can’t. Y ou want the person to open his or her eyes, but they don’t. Families of coma
patients often resort to opening the patient’s eyes themselves. It’s a way of forcing theissue—of ordering the patient to wake up. Of course it doesn’t work, and it can also
further damage morale. Patients in deep coma lose the coordination of their eyes and
pupils. Open the lids of a deep coma patient, and you’re likely to find one eye pointing
in one direction, the other in the opposite. It’s an unnerving sight, and it added further
to Holley’s pain several times that week when she pried my eyelids open and saw, in
essence, the askew eyeballs of a corpse.
With Jean gone, things really started to fray. Phyllis now began to exhibit a behavior
I’d also seen countless times among patients’ family members in my own practice. She
started to become frustrated with my doctors.
“Why aren’t they giving us more information?” she asked Betsy, outraged.
“I swear,
if Eben were here, he would tell us what’s really going on.
”
The fact was that my doctors were doing absolutely everything they could do for
me. Phyllis, of course, knew this. But the pain and frustration of the situation were
simply wearing away at my loved ones.
On Tuesday, Holley had called Dr. Jay Loeffler, my former partner in developing the
stereotactic radiosurgery program at the Brigham & Women’s Hospital in Boston. Jay
was then the chairman of radiation oncology at Massachusetts General Hospital, and
Holley figured he’d be in as good a position as anyone to give her some answers.
As Holley described my situation, Jay assumed she must have been getting the details
of my case wrong. What she was describing to him was, he knew, essentially
impossible. But once Holley finally had him convinced that I really was in a coma
caused by a rare case of E. coli bacterial meningitis that no one could explain the
origins of, he got started calling infectious disease experts around the country. No one
he spoke to had heard of a case like mine. Going over the medical literature back to
1991, he couldn’t find a single case of E. coli meningitis in an adult who hadn’t
recently been through a neurosurgical procedure.
From Tuesday on, Jay called at least once a day to get an update from Phyllis or
Holley and give them feedback on what his investigations had revealed. Steve Tatter,
another good friend and neurosurgeon, likewise provided daily calls offering advice and
comfort. But day after day, the only revelation was that my situation was the first of its
kind in medical history. Spontaneous E. coli bacterial meningitis is rare in adults. Less
than 1 in 10 million of the world’s population contracts it annually. And, like all varieties
of gram-negative bacterial meningitis, it’s highly aggressive. So aggressive that of the
people it does attack, more than 90 percent of those who initially suffer from a rapid
neurologic decline, as I did, die. And that was the mortality rate when I first entered the
ER. That dismal 90 percent crept toward 100 percent as the week wore on and my
body failed to respond to the antibiotics. The few who survive a case as severe as mine
generally require round-the-clock care for the rest of their lives. Officially, my status
was “N of 1,
” a term that refers to medical studies in which a single patient stands forthe entire trial. There is simply no one else to whom the doctors could compare my
case.
 “no” response.
The third method is the simplest, yet, like the others, requires
some practice. Simply lift a heavy object, such as a large
dictionary or merely a couple of bricks, from a table about
waist high. Hold in mind an image or true statement to be
calibrated and then lift. Then, for contrast, hold in mind that
which is known to be false. Note the ease of lifting when truth
is held in mind and the greater effort necessary to lift the load
when the issue is false (not true). The results can be verified
using the other two methods.
Calibration of Specific Levels
The critical point between positive and negative, between true
and false, or between that which is constructive or
destructive, is at the calibrated level of 200 (see Map in
Appendix B). Anything above 200, or true, makes the subject
go strong; anything below 200, or false, allows the arm to go
weak.
Anything past or present, including images or statements,
historical events, or personages, can be tested. They need not
be verbalized.
Numerical Calibration
312Example: “Ramana Maharshi’s teachings calibrate over 700.”
(Y/N). Or, “Hitler calibrated over 200.” (Y/N). “When he was
in his 20s.” (Y/N). “His 30s.” (Y/N). “His 40s.” (Y/N). “At
the time of his death.” (Y/N).
Applications
The muscle test cannot be used to foretell the future;
otherwise, there are no limits as to what can be asked.
Consciousness has no limits in time or space; however,
permission may be denied. All current or historical events are
available for questioning. The answers are impersonal and do
not depend on the belief systems of either the tester or the test
subject. For example, protoplasm recoils from noxious stimuli
and flesh bleeds. Those are the qualities of these test materials
and are impersonal. Consciousness actually knows only truth
because only truth has actual existence. It does not respond to
falsehood because falsehood does not have existence in
Reality. It will also not respond accurately to nonintegrous or
egoistical questions.
Accurately speaking, the test response is either an “on”
response or merely a “not on” response. Like the electrical
switch, we say the electricity is “on,” and when we use the
term “off,” we just mean that it is not there. In reality, there is
no such thing as off-ness. This is a subtle statement but
crucial to the understanding of the nature of consciousness.
Consciousness is capable of recognizing only Truth. It merely
fails to respond to falsehood. Similarly, a mirror reflects an
image only if there is an object to reflect. If no object is
present to the mirror, there is no reflected image.
To Calibrate A Level
313Calibrated levels are relative to a specific reference scale. To
arrive at the same figures as in the chart in Appendix A,
reference must be made to that table or by a statement such
as, “On a scale of human consciousness from 1 to 1,000,
where 600 indicates Enlightenment, this
calibrates
_______
over_______(a number).” Or, “On a scale of consciousness
where 200 is the level of Truth and 500 is the level of Love,
this statement calibrates over______.” (State a specific
number.)
General Information
People generally want to determine truth from falsehood.
Therefore, the statement has to be made very specifically.
Avoid using general terms such as a good job to apply for.
Good in what way? Pay scale? Working conditions?
Promotional opportunities? Fairness of the boss?
Expertise
Familiarity with the test brings progressive expertise. The
right questions to ask begin to spring forth and can become
almost uncannily accurate. If the same tester and test subject
work together for a period of time, one or both of them will
develop what can become an amazing accuracy and capability
of pinpointing just what specific questions to ask, even
though the subject is totally unknown by either one. For
instance, the tester has lost an object and begins by saying, “I
left it in my office.” (Answer: No.) “I left it in the car.”
(Answer: No.) All of a sudden, the test subject almost sees the
object and says, “Ask, On the back of the bathroom door.”
The test subject says, “The object is hanging on the back of
the bathroom door.” (Answer: Yes.) In this actual case, the
314test subject did not even know that the tester had stopped for
gas and left a jacket in the restroom of a gasoline station.
Any information can be obtained about anything anywhere in
current or past time or space, depending on receiving prior
permission. (Sometimes one gets a “no,” perhaps for karmic
or other unknown reasons.) By cross-checking, accuracy can
be easily confirmed. For anyone who learns the technique,
more information is available instantaneously than can be
held in all the computers and libraries of the world. The
possibilities are therefore obviously unlimited, and the
prospects breathtaking.
Limitations
The test is accurate only if the test subjects themselves
calibrate over 200 and the intention for the use of the test is
integrous, calibrating over 200. The requirement is one of
detached objectivity and alignment with truth rather than
subjective opinion. Thus, to try to prove a point negates
accuracy. Approximately 10% of the population is not able to
use the kinesiologic testing technique for as yet unknown
reasons. Sometimes married couples, for reasons as yet
undiscovered, are unable to use each other as test subjects and
may have to find a third person to be a test partner.
A suitable test subject is a person whose arm goes strong
when a love object or person is held in mind, and it goes weak
if that which is negative (fear, hate, guilt, etc.) is held in mind
(e.g., Winston Churchill makes one go strong, and Osama bin
Laden makes one go weak).
315Occasionally, a suitable test subject gives paradox ical
responses. This can usually be cleared by doing the thymic
thump. (With a closed fist, thump three times over the upper
breastbone, smile, and say “ha-ha-ha” with each thump and
mentally picture someone or something that is loved.) The
temporary imbalance will then clear up.
The imbalance may be the result of recently having been with
negative people, listening to heavy-metal rock music,
watching violent television programs, playing violent video
games, etc. Negative music energy has a deleterious effect on
the energy system of the body for up to one-half hour after it
is turned off. Television commercials or background are also
a common source of negative energy.
As previously noted, this method of discerning truth from
falsehood and the calibrated levels of truth has strict
requirements. Because of the limitations, calibrated levels are
supplied for ready reference in Truth vs. Falsehood.
Explanation
The muscle-strength test is independent of personal opinion
or beliefs and is an impersonal response of the field of
consciousness, just as protoplasm is impersonal in its
responses. This can be demonstrated by the observation that
the test responses are the same whether verbalized or held
silently in mind. Thus, the test subject is not influenced by the
question as they do not even know what it is. To demonstrate
this, do the following exercise:
The tester holds in mind an image unknown to the test subject
and states, “The image I am holding in mind is positive” (or
316“true,” or “calibrates over 200,” etc.). Upon direction, the test
subject then resists the downward pressure on the wrist. If the
tester holds a positive image in mind (e.g., Abraham Lincoln,
Jesus, Mother Teresa, etc.), the test subject’s arm muscle will
go strong. If the tester holds a false statement or negative
image in mind (e.g., bin Laden, Hitler, etc.), the arm will go
weak. Inasmuch as the test subject does not know what the
tester has in mind, the results are not influenced by personal
beliefs.
Disqualification
Both skepticism (cal. 160) and cynicism, as well as atheism,
calibrate below 200 because they reflect negative
prejudgment. In contrast, true inquiry requires an open mind
and honesty devoid of intellectual vanity. Negative studies of
the testing methodology all calibrate below 200 (usually at
160), as do the investigators themselves.
That even famous professors can and do calibrate below 200
may seem surprising to the average person. Thus, negative
studies are a consequence of negative bias. As an example,
Francis Crick’s research design that led to the discovery of
the double helix pattern of DNA calibrated at 440. His last
research design, which was intended to prove that
consciousness was just a product of neuronal activity,
calibrated at only 135. (He was an atheist.)
The failure of investigators who themselves, or by faulty
research design, calibrate below 200 (usually at 160),
confirms the truth of the very methodology they claim to
disprove. They should get negative results, and so they do,
317which paradoxically proves the accuracy of the test to detect
the difference between unbiased integrity and nonintegrity.
Any new discovery may upset the apple cart and be viewed as
a threat to the status quo of prevailing belief systems. That
consciousness research validates spiritual Reality is, of
course, going to precipitate resistance, as it is actually a direct
confrontation to the dominion of the narcissistic core of the
ego itself, which is innately presumptuous and opinionated.
Below consciousness level 200, comprehension is limited by
the dominance of Lower Mind, which is capable of
recognizing facts but not yet able to grasp what is meant by
the term truth (it confuses res interna with res externa), and
that truth has physiological accompaniments that are different
from falsehood. Additionally, truth is intuited as evidenced by
the use of voice analysis, the study of body language,
pupillary response, EEG changes in the brain, fluctuations in
breathing and blood pressure, galvanic skin response,
dowsing, and even the Huna technique of measuring the
distance that the aura radiates from the body. Some people
have a very simple technique that utilizes the standing body
like a pendulum (fall forward with truth and backward with
falsehood).
From a more advanced contextualization, the principles that
prevail are that Truth cannot be disproved by falsehood any
more than light can be disproved by darkness. The nonlinear
is not subject to the limitations of the linear. Truth is a
paradigm different from logic and thus is not provable, as that
which is provable calibrates only in the 400s. Consciousness
research methodology operates at level 600, which is at the
interface of the linear and the nonlinear dimensions.
318Discrepancies
Differing calibrations may be obtained over time or by
different investigators for a variety of reasons:
1. Situations, people, politics, policies, and attitudes change
over time.
2. People tend to use different sensory modalities when they
hold something in mind, i.e., visual, sensory, auditory, or
feeling. Your mother could therefore be how she looked, felt,
sounded, etc., or Henry Ford could be calibrated as a father,
as an industrialist, for his impact on America, his
anti-Semitism, etc.
3. Accuracy increases with the level of consciousness. (The
400s and above are the most accurate.)
One can specify context and stick to a prevailing modality.
The same team using the same technique will get results that
are internally consistent. Expertise develops with practice.
There are some people, however, who are incapable of a
scientific, detached attitude and are unable to be objective,
and for whom the testing method will therefore not be
accurate. Dedication and intention to the truth has to be given
priority over personal opinions and trying to prove them as
being “right.”
Note
While it was discovered that the technique does not work for
people who calibrate at less than level 200, only quite
recently was it further discovered that the technique does not
319work if the persons doing the testing are atheists. This may be
simply the consequence of the fact that atheism calibrates
below level 200, and that negation of the truth or Divinity
(omniscience) karmically disqualifies the negator just as hate
negates love.
320321REFERENCES
Abraham, R., and Shaw, C., Dynamics:The Geometry of
Behavior, Vols. I-III. Santa Cruz, California: Aerial Press,
1984.
Amoroso, R., “Consciousness: A Radical Definition.” Toward
a Scientific Basis for Consciousness; an Interdisciplinary
Conference. University of Arizona, Health Sciences Center,
Tucson, Arizona, April 12-17, 1994.
Anonymous, AA Today. New York: Cornwall Press. 1960.
Anonymous, A Course in Miracles. Huntington Station, New
York: Foundation for Inner Peace, Coleman-Graphics. 1975.
Anonymous, Alcoholics Anonymous. New York: Alcoholics
Anonymous Publishing, Inc. 1955.
Anonymous, Alcoholics Anonymous Comes of Age: A Brief
History of AA. New York: Alcoholics Anonymous
Publishing, Inc. 1957.
Anonymous, Twelve Steps and Twelve Traditions. New York:
Alcoholics Anonymous Publishing, Inc. 1953.
The Anti-Stalin Campaign and International Commission: A
Selection of Documents. New York: Columbia University
(Russian Institute). 1956.
Balsekar, R. S., A Duet of One: The Ashtavatra Gita
Dialogue. Redondo Beach, California:Advaita Press. 1989.
322—, Experiencing the Teaching. Redondo Beach,
California:Advaita Press. 1988.
—, Exploration into the Eternal. Durham, North Carolina:
Acorn Press. 1989.
—, The Final Truth. Redondo Beach, California: Advaita
Press. 1989.
—, From Consciousness to Consciousness. Redondo Beach,
California:Advaita Press. 1989.
—, Personal Interviews. Redondo Beach, California: Advaita
Press. 1987.
—, Pointers from Nisagargadatta Maharaj. Durham, North
Carolina:Acorn Press. 1990.
Barzon, J., “The Paradoxes of Creativity.” The American
Scholar. No. 50, pp. 337-351. Summer 1989.
Bendat, J. S., and Pearson, A. G., Measurement and Analysis
of Random Data. New York: John Wiley and Sons. 1966.
Beringa, M., “The Mind Revealed.” Science. No. 249, pp.
156-158. August 24, 1990.
Bill W., The Language of the Heart. New York: Cornwall
Press. 1988.
Blakney, R. B. (trans.), Meister Eckhart. New York: Harper
& Row. 1942.
323Bohm, D., Quantum Theory. New York: Prentice-Hall. 1980.
—, Wholeness and the Implicate Order. London: Routledge
& Kegan Paul. 1980.
—, and Peat, F. D., Science, Order, and Creativity. New
York: Bantam Books. 1987.
—, Hiley, B., and Kaloyerous, P N., “An Ontological Basis
for Quantum Theory.” Phys. Reports. No. 144:6, p. 323.
Briggs, J., Fractals: The Patterns of Chaos. New York:
Simon & Schuster. 1993.
—, and Peat, F.D. Looking Glass Universe. New York: Simon
& Schuster. 1984.
—, and Peat, F.D., Turbulent Mirror: An Illustrated Guide to
Chaos Theory and the Science of Wholeness. New York:
Harper & Row. 1989.
Brinkley, D., Saved by the Light. New York: Villard Books.
1994.
Bruner, J. S., and Posteman, L., “On the Perception of
Incongruity: A Paradigm.” Journal of Personality. No. 18, pp.
206.1949.
Brunton, P, A Search in Secret India. Los Angeles: Weiser.
1984.
Butz, M., Psychological Reports. No. 17, pp. 827-843 and
1043-1063. 1993.
324Capra, F., The Tao of Physics: An Exploration of the
Parallels Between Modern Physics and Eastern Mysticism.
New York: Bantam. 1976.
—, The Turning Point: Science, Society, and the Rising
Culture. New York: Bantam. 1982.
Chalmers, D., “On Explaining Consciousness Scientifically:
Choices and Challenges.” Toward a Scientific Basis for
Consciousness; an Interdisciplinary Conference. University
of Arizona, Health Sciences Center, Tucson, Arizona, April
12-17, 1994.
Chew, G. F., “Bootstrap: A Scientific Idea.” Science. No.
161. May 23,1968.
—, “Hadron Bootstrap: Triumph or Frustration?” Physics
Today. October 23, 1970.
—, “Impasse for the Elementary Particle Content.” In The
Great Ideas Today. Chicago: Encyclopedia Brittanica. 1974.
Churchill, W S., Blood, Sweat, and Tears. New York: G. P
Putnam and Sons. 1941.
Combs, A., “Consciousness as a System Near the Edge of
Chaos.” Toward a Scientific Basis for Consciousness; an
Interdisciplinary Conference. University of Arizona, Health
Sciences Center, Tucson, Arizona, April 12-17, 1994.
Crick, F., and Koch, “The Problem of Consciousness.”
Scientific American. No. 267, pp. 152-159. September 1992.
325Crusade in Europe. “1939: Marching Time.” Collectors
Videos.
Cuomo, M., Lincoln on Democracy. New York: Harper
Collins. 1990.
De

One motivation for the CEV proposal was to avoid creating a motive for humans
to fight over the creation of the first superintelligent AI. Although the CEV proposal
scores better on this desideratum than many alternatives, it does not entirely
eliminate motives for conflict. A selfish individual, group, or nation might seek to
enlarge its slice of the future by keeping others out of the extrapolation base.
A power grab of this sort might be rationalized in various ways. It might be
argued, for instance, that the sponsor who funds the development of the AI deserves
to own the outcome. This moral claim is probably false. It could be objected, for
example, that the project that launches the first successful seed AI imposes a vast
risk externality on the rest of humanity, which therefore is entitled to compensation.
The amount of compensation owed is so great that it can only take the form of
giving everybody a stake in the upside if things turn out well.
18
Another argument that might be used to rationalize a power grab is that large
segments of humanity have base or evil preferences and that including them in the
extrapolation base would risk turning humanity’s future into a dystopia. It is
difficult to know the share of good and bad in the average person’s heart. It is also
difficult to know how much this balance varies between different groups, social
strata, cultures, or nations. Whether one is optimistic or pessimistic about human
nature, one may prefer not to wager humanity’s cosmic endowment on the
speculation that, for a sufficient majority of the seven billion people currently alive,
their better angels would prevail in their extrapolated volitions. Of course, omittinga certain set of people from the extrapolation base does not guarantee that light
would triumph; and it might well be that the souls that would soonest exclude others
or grab power for themselves tend rather to contain unusually large amounts of
darkness.
Yet another reason for fighting over the initial dynamic is that one might believe
that somebody else’s AI will not work as advertised, even if the AI is billed as a way
to implement humanity’s CEV . If different groups have different beliefs about
which implementation is most likely to succeed, they might fight to prevent the
others from launching. It would be better in such situations if the competing projects
could settle their epistemic differences by some method that more reliably
ascertains who is right than the method of armed conflict.
19
Morality models
The CEV proposal is not the only possible form of indirect normativity. For
example, instead of implementing humanity’s coherent extrapolated volition, one
could try to build an AI with the goal of doing what is morally right, relying on the
AI’s superior cognitive capacities to figure out just which actions fit that
description. We can call this proposal “moral rightness” (MR). The idea is that we
humans have an imperfect understanding of what is right and wrong, and perhaps an
even poorer understanding of how the concept of moral rightness is to be
philosophically analyzed: but a superintelligence could understand these things
better.
20
What if we are not sure whether moral realism is true? We could still attempt the
MR proposal. We should just have to make sure to specify what the AI should do in
the eventuality that its presupposition of moral realism is false. For example, we
could stipulate that if the AI estimates with a sufficient probability that there are no
suitable non-relative truths about moral rightness, then it should revert to
implementing coherent extrapolated volition instead, or simply shut itself down.
21
MR appears to have several advantages over CEV . MR would do away with
various free parameters in CEV , such as the degree of coherence among extrapolated
volitions that is required for the AI to act on the result, the ease with which a
majority can overrule dissenting minorities, and the nature of the social environment
within which our extrapolated selves are to be supposed to have “grown up farther
together.
” It would seem to eliminate the possibility of a moral failure resulting
from the use of an extrapolation base that is too narrow or too wide. Furthermore,
MR would orient the AI toward morally right action even if our coherent
extrapolated volitions happen to wish for the AI to take actions that are morally
odious. As noted earlier, this seems a live possibility with the CEV proposal. Moralgoodness might be more like a precious metal than an abundant element in human
nature, and even after the ore has been processed and refined in accordance with the
prescriptions of the CEV proposal, who knows whether the principal outcome will be
shining virtue, indifferent slag, or toxic sludge?
MR would also appear to have some disadvantages. It relies on the notion of
“morally right,
” a notoriously difficult concept, one with which philosophers have
grappled since antiquity without yet attaining consensus as to its analysis. Picking an
erroneous explication of “moral rightness” could result in outcomes that would be
morally very wrong. This difficulty of defining “moral rightness” might seem to
count heavily against the MR proposal. However, it is not clear that the MR proposal
is really at a material disadvantage in this regard. The CEV proposal, too, uses terms
and concepts that are difficult to explicate (such as “knowledge,
” “being more the
people we wished we were,
” “grown up farther together,
” among others).
22 Even if
these concepts are marginally less opaque than “moral rightness,
” they are still
miles removed from anything that programmers can currently express in code.
23 The
path to endowing an AI with any of these concepts might involve giving it general
linguistic ability (comparable, at least, to that of a normal human adult). Such a
general ability to understand natural language could then be used to understand what
is meant by “morally right.
” If the AI could grasp the meaning, it could search for
actions that fit. As the AI develops superintelligence, it could then make progress on
two fronts: on the philosophical problem of understanding what moral rightness is,
and on the practical problem of applying this understanding to evaluate particular
actions.
24 While this would not be easy, it is not clear that it would be any more
difficult than extrapolating humanity’s coherent extrapolated volition.
25
A more fundamental issue with MR is that even if can be implemented, it might
not give us what we want or what we would choose if we were brighter and better
informed. This is of course the essential feature of MR, not an accidental bug.
However, it might be a feature that would be extremely harmful to us.
26
One might try to preserve the basic idea of the MR model while reducing its
demandingness by focusing on moral permissibility: the idea being that we could let
the AI pursue humanity’s CEV so long as it did not act in ways that are morally
impermissible. For example, one might formulate the following goal for the AI:
Among the actions that are morally permissible for the AI, take one that
humanity’s CEV would prefer. However, if some part of this instruction has no
well-specified meaning, or if we are radically confused about its meaning, or if
moral realism is false, or if we acted morally impermissibly in creating an AI
with this goal, then undergo a controlled shutdown.
27 Follow the intended
meaning of this instruction.One might still worry that this moral permissibility model (MP) represents an
unpalatably high degree of respect for the requirements of morality. How big a
sacrifice it would entail depends on which ethical theory is true.
28 If ethics is
satisficing, in the sense that it counts as morally permissible any action that
conforms to a few basic moral constraints, then MP may leave ample room for our
coherent extrapolated volition to influence the AI’s actions. However, if ethics is
maximizing—for example, if the only morally permissible actions are those that
have the morally best consequences—then MP may leave little or no room for our
own preferences to shape the outcome.
To illustrate this concern, let us return for a moment to the example of hedonistic
consequentialism. Suppose that this ethical theory is true, and that the AI knows it to
be so. For present purposes, we can define hedonistic consequentialism as the claim
that an action is morally right (and morally permissible) if and only if, among all
feasible actions, no other action would produce a greater balance of pleasure over
suffering. The AI, following MP, might maximize the surfeit of pleasure by
converting the accessible universe into hedonium, a process that may involve
building computronium and using it to perform computations that instantiate
pleasurable experiences. Since simulating any existing human brain is not the most
efficient way of producing pleasure, a likely consequence is that we all die.
By enacting either the MR or the MP proposal, we would thus risk sacrificing our
lives for a greater good. This would be a bigger sacrifice than one might think,
because what we stand to lose is not merely the chance to live out a normal human
life but the opportunity to enjoy the far longer and richer lives that a friendly
superintelligence could bestow.
The sacrifice looks even less appealing when we reflect that the superintelligence
could realize a nearly-as-great good (in fractional terms) while sacrificing much less
of our own potential well-being. Suppose that we agreed to allow almost the entire
accessible universe to be converted into hedonium—everything except a small
preserve, say the Milky Way, which would be set aside to accommodate our own
needs. Then there would still be a hundred billion galaxies devoted to the
maximization of pleasure. But we would have one galaxy within which to create
wonderful civilizations that could last for billions of years and in which humans and
nonhuman animals could survive and thrive, and have the opportunity to develop
into beatific posthuman spirits.
29
If one prefers this latter option (as I would be inclined to do) it implies that one
does not have an unconditional lexically dominant preference for acting morally
permissibly. But it is consistent with placing great weight on morality.
Even from a purely moral point of view, it might be better to advocate some
proposal that is less morally ambitious than MR or MP. If the morally best has nochance of being implemented—perhaps because of its frowning demandingness—it
might be morally better to promote some other proposal, one that would be near-
ideal and whose chances of being implemented could be significantly increased by
our promoting it.
30
Do What I Mean
We might feel unsure whether to go for CEV , MR, MP, or something else. Could we
punt on this higher-level decision as well, offloading even more cognitive work onto
the AI? Where is the limit to our possible laziness?
Consider, for example, the following “reasons-based” goal:
Do whatever we would have had most reason to ask the AI to do.
This goal might boil down to extrapolated volition or morality or something else,
but it would seem to spare us the effort and risk involved in trying to figure out for
ourselves which of these more specific objectives we would have most reason to
select.
Some of the problems with the morality-based goals, however, also apply here.
First, we might fear that this reasons-based goal would leave too little room for our
own desires. Some philosophers maintain that a person always has most reason to do
what it would be morally best for her to do. If those philosophers are right, then the
reason-based goal collapses into MR—with the concomitant risk that a
superintelligence implementing such a dynamic would kill everyone within reach.
Second, as with all proposals couched in technical language, there is a possibility
that we might have misunderstood the meaning of our own assertions. We saw that,
in the case of the morality-based goals, asking the AI to do what is right may lead to
unforeseen and unwanted consequences such that, had we anticipated them, we
would not have implemented the goal in question. The same applies to asking the AI
to do what we have most reason to do.
What if we try to avoid these difficulties by couching a goal in emphatically
nontechnical language—such as in terms of “niceness”:31
Take the nicest action; or, if no action is nicest, then take an action that is at
least super-duper nice.
How could there be anything objectionable about building a nice AI? But we must
ask what precisely is meant by this expression. The lexicon lists various meanings of“nice” that are clearly not intended to be used here: we do not intend that the AI
should be courteous and polite nor overdelicate or fastidious. If we can count on the
AI recognizing the intended interpretation of “niceness” and being motivated to
pursue niceness in just that sense, then this goal would seem to amount to a
command to do what the programmers meant for the AI to do.
32 An injunction to
similar effect was included in the formulation of CEV (“
… interpreted as we wish
that interpreted”) and in the moral-permissibility criterion as rendered earlier (“
…
follow the intended meaning of this instruction”). By affixing such a “Do What I
Mean” clause we may indicate that the other words in the goal description should be
construed charitably rather than literally. But saying that the AI should be “nice”
adds almost nothing: the real work is done by the “Do What I Mean” instruction. If
we knew how to code “Do What I Mean” in a general and powerful way, we might as
well use that as a standalone goal.
How might one implement such a “Do What I Mean” dynamic? That is, how
might we create an AI motivated to charitably interpret our wishes and unspoken
intentions and to act accordingly? One initial step could be to try to get clearer about
what we mean by “Do What I Mean.
” It might help if we could explicate this in
more behavioristic terms, for example in terms of revealed preferences in various
hypothetical situations—such as situations in which we had more time to consider
the options, in which we were smarter, in which we knew more of the relevant facts,
and in which in various other ways conditions would be more favorable for us
accurately manifesting in concrete choices what we mean when we say that we want
an AI that is friendly, beneficial, nice …
Here, of course, we come full circle. We have returned to the indirect normativity
approach with which we started—the CEV proposal, which, in essence, expunges all
concrete content from the value specification, leaving only an abstract value defined
in purely procedural terms: to do that which we would have wished for the AI to do
in suitably idealized circumstances. By means of such indirect normativity, we could
hope to offload to the AI much of the cognitive work that we ourselves would be
trying to perform if we attempted to articulate a more concrete description of what
values the AI is to pursue. In seeking to take full advantage of the AI’s epistemic
superiority, CEV can thus be seen as an application of the principle of epistemic
deference.
Component list
So far we have considered different options for what content to put into the goal
system. But an AI’s behavior will also be influenced by other design choices. In
particular, it can make a critical difference which decision theory and whichepistemology it uses. Another important question is whether the AI’s plans will be
subject to human review before being put into action.
Table 13 summarizes these design choices. A project that aims to build a
superintelligence ought to be able to explain what choices it has made regarding
each of these components, and to justify why those choices were made.
33
Table 13 Component list
What objective should the AI pursue? How should a description of
Goal content
this objective be interpreted? Should the objective include giving
special rewards to those who contributed to the project’s success?
Decision
theory
Should the AI use causal decision theory, evidential decision theory,
updateless decision theory, or something else?
What should the AI’s prior probability function be, and what other
Epistemology
explicit or implicit assumptions about the world should it make?
What theory of anthropics should it use?
Ratification
Should the AI’s plans be subjected to human review before being put
into effect? If so, what is the protocol for that review process?
Goal content
We have already discussed how indirect normativity might be used in specifying the
values that the AI is to pursue. We discussed some options, such as morality-based
models and coherent extrapolated volition. Each such option creates further choices
that need to be made. For instance, the CEV approach comes in many varieties,
depending on who is included in the extrapolation base, the structure of the
extrapolation, and so forth. Other forms of motivation selection methods might call
for different types of goal content. For example, an oracle might be built to place a
value on giving accurate answers. An oracle constructed with domesticity
motivation might also have goal content that disvalues the excessive use of
resources in producing its answers.
Another design choice is whether to include special provisions in the goal content
to reward individuals who contribute to the successful realization of the AI, for
example by giving them extra resources or influence over the AI’s behavior. We can
term any such provisions “incentive wrapping.
” Incentive wrapping could be seen as
a way to increase the likelihood that the project will be successful, at the cost of
compromising to some extent the goal that the project set out to achieve.
For example, if the project’s goal is to create a dynamic that implements
humanity’s coherent extrapolated volition, then an incentive wrapping scheme mightspecify that certain individuals’ volitions should be given extra weight in the
extrapolation. If such a project is successful, the result is not necessarily the
implementation of humanity’s coherent extrapolated volition. Instead, some
approximation to this goal might be achieved.
34
Since incentive wrapping would be a piece of goal content that would be
interpreted and pursued by a superintelligence, it could take advantage of indirect
normativity to specify subtle and complicated provisions that would be difficult for
a human manager to implement. For example, instead of rewarding programmers
according to some crude but easily accessible metric, such as how many hours they
worked or how many bugs they corrected, the incentive wrapping could specify that
programmers “are to be rewarded in proportion to how much their contributions
increased some reasonable ex ante probability of the project being successfully
completed in the way the sponsors intended.
” Further, there would be no reason to
limit the incentive wrapping to project staff. It could instead specify that every
person should be rewarded according to their just deserts. Credit allocation is a
difficult problem, but a superintelligence could be expected to do a reasonable job of
approximating the criteria specified, explicitly or implicitly, by the incentive
wrapping.
It is conceivable that the superintelligence might even find some way of
rewarding individuals who have died prior to the superintelligence’s creation.
35 The
incentive wrapping could then be extended to embrace at least some of the deceased,
potentially including individuals who died before the project was conceived, or even
antedating the first enunciation of the concept of incentive wrapping. Although the
institution of such a retroactive policy would not causally incentivize those people
who are already resting in their graves as these words are being put to the page, it
might be favored for moral reasons—though it could be argued that insofar as
fairness is a goal, it should be included as part of the target specification proper
rather than in the surrounding incentive wrapping.
We cannot here delve into all the ethical and strategic issues associated with
incentive wrapping. A project’s position on these issues, however, would be an
important aspect of its fundamental design concept.
Decision theory
Another important design choice is which decision theory the AI should be built to
use. This might affect how the AI behaves in certain strategically fateful situations.
It might determine, for instance, whether the AI is open to trade with, or extortion
by, other superintelligent civilizations whose existence it hypothesizes. The
particulars of the decision theory could also matter in predicaments involving finiteprobabilities of infinite payoffs (“Pascalian wagers”) or extremely small
probabilities of extremely large finite payoffs (“Pascalian muggings”) or in contexts
where the AI is facing fundamental normative uncertainty or where there are
multiple instantiations of the same agent program.
36
The options on the table include causal decision theory (in a variety of flavors)
and evidential decision theory, along with newer candidates such as “timeless
decision theory” and “updateless decision theory,
” which are still under
development.
37 It may prove difficult to identify and articulate the correct decision
theory, and to have justified confidence that we have got it right. Although the
prospects for directly specifying an AI’s decision theory are perhaps more hopeful
than those of directly specifying its final values, we are still confronted with a
substantial risk of error. Many of the complications that might break the currently
most popular decision theories were discovered only recently, suggesting that there
might exist further problems that have not yet come into sight. The result of giving
the AI a flawed decision theory might be disastrous, possibly amounting to an
existential catastrophe.
In view of these difficulties, one might consider an indirect approach to
specifying the decision theory that the AI should use. Exactly how to do this is not
yet clear. We might want the AI to use “that decision theory D which we would have
wanted it to use had we thought long and hard about the matter.
” However, the AI
would need to be able to make decisions before learning what D is. It would thus
need some effective interim decision theory D’ that would govern its search for D.
One might try to define D’ to be some sort of superposition of the AI’s current
perceptions and affections, which form within the lived as immanent
to a subject, to a consciousness. They are qualitative or intensive
multiplicities, like "redness" or "baldness," where we cannot decide
whether certain elements do or do not belong to the set. These lived
sets are expressed in a third kind of prospects, which are no longer
those of scientific statements or logical propositions but of the sub-
ject's pure and simple opinions, of subjective evaluations or judg-
ments of taste: this is already red, he is nearly bald. However, even
for an enemy of philosophy, the refuge of philosophical concepts
cannot immediately be found in such empirical judgments. We must
isolate the functions, of which these fuzzy sets, these lived contents,
are only variables. And at this point we face an alternative: either we
will end up reconstituting scientific or logical functions for these
variables, which would make the appeal to philosophical concepts
definitively useless," or we will have to invent a new, specifically
philosophical type of function, a third zone in which everything
seems to be strangely reversed, since it will be given the task of
supporting the other two.
If the world of the lived is like the earth, which must found and
support the science and logic of states of affairs, it is clear that
apparently philosophical concepts are required to carry out this first
foundation. The philosophical concept thus requires a "belonging"
to a subject and no longer to a set. Not that the philosophical concept
is to be confused with the merely lived, even if it is defined as a
multiplicity of fusion or as immanence of a flow to the subject-the
lived only furnishes variables, whereas concepts must still define true
functions. These functions will have reference only to the lived, as
scientific functions have reference to states of affairs. Philosophical
concepts will be functions of the lived, as scientific concepts are
functions of states of affairs; but the order or the derivation nowPhilosophy, Science, Logic, and Art
changes direction since these functions of the lived become primary,
A transcendental logic (it can also be called dialectical) embraces the
earth and all that it bears, and this serves as the primordial ground
for formal logic and the derivative regional sciences, It is necessary
therefore to discover at the very heart of the immanence of the lived
to a subject, that subject's acts of transcendence capableofconstituting
new functions of variables or conceptual references: in this sense the
subject is no longer solipsist and empirical but transcendental. We
have seen that Kant began to accomplish this task by showing how
philosophical concepts are necessarily related to lived experience
through a priori propositions or judgment as functions of a whole of
possible experience. But it is Husserl who sees it through to the end
by discovering, in non-numerical multiplicities or immanent per-
ceptivo-affective fusional sets, the triple root of acts of transcendence
(thought) through which the subject constitutes first of all a sensory
world filled with objects, then an intersubjective world occupied by
the other, and finally a common ideal world that will be occupied by
scientific, mathematical, and logical formations. Numerous phenome-
nological or philosophical concepts (such as "being in the world,"
"fl h." "id lit " t) h ' h
es, 1 ea 1 y, e c. are t e expression of t ese acts. They are not
only Iiveds that are immanent to the solipsist subject but references
of the transcendental subject to the lived; they are not perceptive-
affective variables, but major functions which find in these variables
their respective trajectories of truth. They are not vague or fuzzy sets,
subsets, but totalizations that exceed all power of sets, They are not
merely empirical judgments or opinions but proto-beliefs, Urdoxa,
original opinions as propositions.6 They are not successive contents of
the flow of immanence but acts of transcendence that traverse it and
carry it away by determining the "significations" of the potential
totality of the lived. The concept as signification is all of this at once:
immanence of the lived to the subject, act of transcendence of the
subject in relation to variations of the lived, totalization of the lived or
function of these acts. It is as if philosophical concepts get going only
Prospc(;ts and Con(;epts
by accepting to become special functions and by denaturing the
immanence that they still need: as immanence is now only that of the
lived it is inevitably immanence to a subject, whose acts (functions)
will be concepts relative to this lived-following, as we have seen, the
long denaturation of the plane of immanence.
Although it may be dangerous for philosophy to depend on the
generosity of logicians, or on their regrets, we might wonder whether
a precarious balance cannot be found between scientifico-logical con-
cepts and phenomenological-philosophical concepts. Gilles-Gaston
Granger has suggested a distribution in which the concept, being
determined first of all as a scientific or logical concept, nonetheless
allows a place for philosophical functions in a third but autonomous
zone, for functions or significations of the lived as virtual totality
(fuzzy sets seem to play the role of a hinge between the two forms of
concepts)." Science has therefore arrogated the concept to itself, but
there are nevertheless nonscientific, that is to say, phenomenological
concepts that are tolerated in homeopathic doses-t-hence the strang-
est hybrids of Frego-Husserlianism, or even Wittgensteino-Heideg-
gerianism, that we see springing up today. This has long been the
situation of philosophy in America, with a large department of logic
and a very small one of phenomenology, even though the two parts
were usually at war. It is like the proverbial lark pie containing one
lark and one horse. But the phenomenological lark is not even the
most exquisite portion; it is only what the logical horse sometimes
leaves for philosophy. The situation is more like the rhinoceros and
the bird that lives on its parasites,
There is a long series of misunderstandings about the concept. It
is true that the concept is fuzzy or vague not because it lacks an
outline but because it is vagabond, nondiscursive, moving about on a
plane of immanence, It is intensional or modular not because it has
n mditions of reference but because it is made up of inseparable
variations that pass through zones of indiscernibility and change its
outline, It has no reference at all, either to the lived or to states ofPhilosophy, Science. Logic, and Art changes direction since these functions of the lived become primary.
A transcendental logic (it can also be called dialectical) embraces the
earth and all that it bears, and this serves as the primordial ground
for formal logic and the derivative regional sciences. It is necessary
therefore to discover at the very heart of the immanence of the lived
to a subject, that subject's acts of transcendence capable ofconstituting
new functions of variables or conceptual references: in this sense the
subject is no longer solipsist and empirical but transcendental. We
have seen that Kant began to accomplish this task by showing how
philosophical concepts are necessarily related to lived experience
through a priori propositions or judgment as functions of a whole of
possible experience. But it is Husserl who sees it through to the end
by discovering, in non-numerical multiplicities or immanent per-
ceptivo-affective fusional sets, the triple root of acts of transcendence
(thought) through which the subject constitutes first of all a sensory
world filled with objects, then an intersubjective world occupied by
the other, and finally a common ideal world that will be occupied by
scientific, mathematical, and logical formations. Numerous phenome-
nological or philosophical concepts (such as "being in the world,"
"fl h" "id 1'" ) . I .
es, I ea tty, etc. are t re expression of these acts. They are not
only liveds that are immanent to the solipsist subject but references
of the transcendental subject to the lived; they are not perceptivo-
affective variables, but major functions which find in these variables
their respective trajectories of truth. They are not vague or fuzzy sets,
subsets, but totalizations that exceed all power of sets. They are not
merely empirical judgments or opinions but proto-beliefs, Urdoxa,
original opinions as propositions.6 They are not successive contents of
the flow of immanence but acts of transcendence that traverse it and
carry it away by determining the "significations" of the potential
totality of the lived. The concept as signification is all of this at once:
immanence of the lived to the subject, act of transcendence of the
subject in relation to variations of the lived, totalization of the lived or
function of these acts. It is as if philosophical concepts get going only
'1.:\ Prospects .lnd Concepts
hy accepting to become special functions and by denaturing the
immanence that they still need: as immanence is now only that of the
lived it is inevitably immanence to a subject, whose acts (functions)
will be concepts relative to this lived-following, as we have seen, the
long denaturation of the plane of immanence.
Although it may be dangerous for philosophy to depend on the
generosity of logicians, or on their regrets, we might wonder whether
a precarious balance cannot be found between scientifico-logical con-
cepts and phenomenological-philosophical concepts. Gilles-Gaston
Granger has suggested a distribution in which the concept, being
determined first of all as a scientific or logical concept, nonetheless
allows a place for philosophical functions in a third but autonomous
zone, for functions or significations of the lived as virtual totality
(fuzzy sets seem to play the role of a hinge between the two forms of
concepts)." Science has therefore arrogated the concept to itself, but
there are nevertheless nonscientific, that is to say, phenomenological
concepts that are tolerated in homeopathic doses-hence the strang-
est hybrids of Frego-Husserlianism, or even Wittgensteino-Heideg-
gerianism, that we see springing up today. This has long been the
situation of philosophy in America, with a large department of logic
and a very small one of phenomenology, even though the two parts
were usually at war. It is like the proverbial lark pie containing one
lark and one horse. But the phenomenological lark is not even the
most exquisite portion; it is only what the logical horse sometimes
leaves for philosophy. The situation is more like the rhinoceros and
the bird that lives on its parasites.
There is a long series of misunderstandings about the concept. It
is true that the concept is fuzzy or vague not because it lacks an
outline but because it is vagabond, nondiscursive, moving about on a
plane of immanence. It is intensional or modular not because it has
conditions of reference but because it is made up of inseparable
variations that pass through zones of indiscernibility and change its
outline. It has no reference at all, either to the lived or to states ofPhilosophy, Science. Logic. and Art
affairs, but a consistency defined by its internal components. The
concept is neither denotation of states of affairs nor signification of the
lived; it is the event as pure sense that immediately runs through the
components. It has no number, either whole or fractional, for count-
ing things that display its properties, but a combination that con-
denses and accumulates the components it traverses and surveys. The
concept is a form or a force; in no possible sense is it ever a function.
In short, there are only philosophical concepts on the plane of imma-
nence, and scientific functions or logical propositions are not con-
cepts.
Prospects designate first of all the elements of the proposition
(propositional function, variables, truth value), but also the various
types of propositions or modalities of judgment. If the philosophical
concept is confused with a function or a proposition, it is not as a
scientific or even logical kind but, by analogy, as a function of the
lived or a proposition of opinion (third type). Hence a concept must
be produced that takes account of this situation: what opinion pro-
poses is a particular relationship between an external perception as
state of a subject and an internal affection as passage from one state to
another (exo- and endoreference). We pick out a quality supposedly
common to several objects that we perceive, and an affection suppos-
edly common to several subjects who experience it and who, along
with us, grasp that quality. Opinion is the rule of the correspondence
of one to the other; it is a function or a proposition whose arguments
are perceptions and affections, and in this sense it is a function of the
lived. For example, we grasp a perceptual quality common to cats or
dogs and a certain feeling that makes us like or hate one or the other:
for a group of objects we can extract many diverse qualities and form
many groups of quite different, attractive or repulsive, subjects (the
"society" of those who like cats or detest them), so that opinions are
essentially the object of a struggle or an exchange. This is the West-
ern democratic, popular conception of philosophy as providing pleas-
ant or aggressive dinner conversations at Mr. Rorty's. Rival opinions
Prospects ,Ind Concepts
at the dinner table-is this not the eternal Athens, our way of being
ereek again? The three characteristics by which philosophy was
related to the Greek city were, precisely, the society of friends, the
table of immanence, and the confrontation of opinions. One might
object that Greek philosophers were always attacking doxa and con-
trasting it with an episteme as the only knowledge adequate to philos-
ophy. But this is a mixed-up business, and philosophers, being only
friends and not wise men, find it very difficult to give up doxa.
Doxa is a type of proposition that arises in the following way: in a
given perceptive-affective lived situation (for example, some cheese is
brought to the dinner table), someone extracts a pure quality from it
(for example, a foul smell); but, at the same time as he abstracts the
quality, he identifies himself with a generic subject experiencing a
common affection (the society of those who detest cheese-competing
as such with those who love it, usually on the basis of another
quality). "Discussion," therefore, bears on the choice of the abstract
perceptual quality and on the power of the generic subject affected.
For example, is to detest cheese to manage without being a bon
vivant? But is being a bon vivant a generically enviable affection?
Ought we not say that it is those who love cheese, and all bans
vivants, who stink? Unless it is the enemies of cheese who stink. This
is like the story, told by Hegel, of the shopkeeper to whom it was
said, "Your eggs are rotten old woman," and who replied, "Rot
yourself, and your mother, and your grandmother": opinion is an
abstract thought, and insult plays an effective role in this abstraction
because opinion expresses the general functions of particular states."
It extracts an abstract quality from perception and a general power
from affection: in this sense all opinion is already political. That is
why so many discussions can be expressed in this way: "as a man, I
consider all women to he unfaithful"; "as a woman, I think men
are liars."
Opinion is a thought that is closely molded on the form or recogni-
tion-recognition of a quality in perception (contemplation), recogni-Philosophy. Science. Logic, and Art tion of a group in affection (reflection), and recognition of a rival in
the possibility of other groups and other qualities (communication).
It gives to the recognition of truth an extension and criteria that are
naturally those of an "orthodoxy": a true opinion will be the one that
coincides with that of the group to which one belongs by expressing
it. This is clear to see in certain competitions: you must express your
opinion, but you "win" (you have spoken the truth) if you say the
same as the majority of those participating in the competition. The
essence of opinion is will to majority and already speaks in the name
of a majority. Even the man of "paradoxes" only expresses himself
with so many winks and such stupid self-assurance because he claims
to express everyone's secret opinion and to be the spokesman of that
which others dare not say. This is still only the first step of opinion's
reign: opinion triumphs when the quality chosen ceases to be the
condition of a group's constitution but is now only the image or
"badge" of the constituted group that itself determines the perceptive
and affective model, the quality and affection, that each must acquire.
Then marketing appears as the concept itself: "We, the conceivers.
...
" Ours is the age of communication, but every noble soul flees and
crawls far away whenever a little discussion, a colloquium, or a
simple conversation is suggested. In every conversation the fate of
philosophy is always at stake, and many philosophical discussions do
not as such go beyond discussions of cheese, including the insults and
the confrontation of worldviews. The philosophy of communication
is exhausted in the search for a universal liberal opinion as consensus,
in which we find again the cynical perceptions and affections of the
capitalist himself.
EXAMPLE I I
How does this situation concern the Greeks? It is often said
that since Plato, the Greeks contrasted philosophy, as a
knowledge that also includes the sciences, with opinion-doxa,
which they releg-ate to the sophists and rhetors, But we have
11,'j Prospects and Concepts
I('al'lled that the opposition was not so dear-cut. How could
philosophers possess knowledge, philosophers who cannot
and do not want to restore the knowledge of the sages and
who are only friends? And how, since it takes a truth value,
could opinion be something entirely for the sophists?"
Furthermore, it seems that the Greeks had a clear-enough
idea of science, which was not confused with philosophy: it
was a knowledge of the cause, of the definition, a sort of
function already. So, the whole problem was, How can one
arrive at definitions, at these premises of the scientific or
logical syllogism? It was by means of the dialectic: an investi-
gation that aimed, on a given theme, to determine which
opinions were the most plausible by reference to the quality
they extracted and which opinions were the wisest by refer-
ence to the subject who advanced them. Even in Aristotle,
the dialectic of opinions was necessary for determining possi-
ble scientific propositions, and in Plato "true opinion" was a
prerequisite for knowledge and the sciences. Even Parmen-
ides did not pose knowledge and opinion as being two dis-
.. h 10
junctive pat ways. Whether or not they were democrats,
the Greeks did not so much oppose knowledge and opinion
as fight over opinions, as confront and compete against each
other in the element of pure opinion. Philosophers blamed
the sophists not for confining themselves to doxa but for
making a bad choice of the quality to be extracted from
perceptions, and of the generic subject to be isolated from
affections, so that the sophists could not reach what was
"true" in an opinion: they remained prisoners of variations of
the lived. Philosophers blamed the sophists for being content
with any kind of sensory quality in relation to an individual
man, or to mankind, or to the nomos of the city (three
interpretations of Man as power or the "measure of every-
thing"). But Platonist philosophers themselves had an ex-Philosophy, Science, Logic, and Art 1·I,B traordinary answer that, they thought, allowed them to select
opinions. It was necessary to choose the quality that was like
the unfolding of the Beautiful in any lived situation, and to
take as generic subject Man inspired by the Good. Things
had to unfold in the beautiful, and their users be inspired by
the good, for opinion to achieve the Truth. This was not
always easy. The beautiful in Nature and the good in minds
define philosophy as a function of the variable life. Thus
Greek philosophy is the moment of the beautiful; the beauti-
ful and the good are functions whose truth value is opinion.
To reach true opinion, perception had to be taken as far as
the beauty of the perceived (dokounta) and affection as far as
the test of the good idohimoe): this will no longer be chang-
ing and arbitrary opinion but an original opinion, a proto-
opinion that restores to us the forgotten homeland of the
concept as, in the great Platonic trilogy, the love of the
Symposium, the delirium of the Phaedrus, and the death of
the Phaedo, Where, on the contrary, the sensory appears
without beauty, reduced to illusion, and the mind appears
without good, given over to simple pleasure, opinion will
remain sophistical itself and false-cheese, perhaps, or mud
or hair. However, does not this passionate search for true
opinion lead the Platonists to an aporia, the very one ex-
pressed in the most astonishing dialogue, the Theatetus?
Knowledge must be transcendent; it must be added to and
distinguished from opinion in order to make opinion true.
But knowledge must be immanent for opinion to be true as
opinion. Greek philosophy still remains attached to that old
Wisdom ready to unfold its transcendence again, although it
now possesses only its friendship, its affection. Immanence is
necessary, but it must be immanent to something trans-
cendent, to ideality. The beautiful and the good continue
to lead us back to transcendence. It is as if true opinion
Prospect% <ll1d Concept,..
still demanded a knowledge that it had nevertheless de-
posed.
Phenomenology can be seen as taking up a similar task.
It, too, goes in search of original opinions which bind u
therefore -^ :
:: m3
: 1,
or the disturbing force of the sun is of the second order
when comnared with the direct action of the earth.CHAPTER IV.
INTEGRATION OF THE DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS.
SECTION L
Generalprocess described.
26. If in the differential equations we substitute tbe
values of P, 2\ and 8 just obtained, we are led to the
following forms:
which cannot be integrated;
but it is found possible to obtain
a solution which will be a first approximation, if we retain
only the important terms on the right-hand side of each
equation. This first approximation being substituted in the
equations, the terms next in order of importance may be
retained and a new solution becomes possible, which in its
turn is the basis of a further approximation, and so on.
First, neglect the disturbing force of the sun which is
of the second order, and also the moon's latitude, which,
as will be seen by referring to the expressions for the
forces (Art. 24), will either enter to the Second power or else
in combination with the disturbing force.28 LUNAB THEORY.
When this is done the equations become integrable, and
values of u and s may be obtained in terms of correct to
the first order; this value of u will then enable us to get
the connexion between 6 and t to the same order.
[Let us, however, bear in mind that the equations thus integrated are not
the differential equations of the moon's motions, but only approximate forma
of them; and it is, therefore, possible that the results obtained may be ap-
proximations to the true solutions only for a limited range of values.
Whether they are so or not, will appear by comparing them with what we
already know of the motion from observation
;
and this previous knowledge^
in the event of their not being approximations, will probably suggest such
modifications of them as will render them so.]
To proceed to the next approximation: We must sim-
plify the right-hand members of our general equations by
employing the values of u and s just obtained, retaining
now terms of the second order which we had previously
neglected.
The integration can always be performed when the right-
hand members of the equations are circular functions (sines
or cosines) of or of its multiples;
and as our first approxi-
mation will give us the values of u and s in that form, the
new expressions for the forces will also be of the same
character, and the equations be again integrable.
Thus we shall obtain new values of w, *, t correct to the
second order. These values, introduced in the same manner
in the second members and terms of the next higher order
retained, will lead to a third approximation, and so on, to
any order; except that if we wish to carry it on beyond
the third, the approximate values of the forces, given in
Art. (24), would no longer be sufficiently exact, and \ve
must obtain more correct values from the expressions of
Art. (23).
27. We must tare stop to notice a peculiarity in these
equations, when solved by this process. Wehave said thatGENERAL PKOCESS OP INTEGRATION. 29
to obtain the values to any order, all terms up to that order
must be retained in the second members
;
but it may happen
that a term of an order beyond that to which we are work-
ing would, if retained, be so altered by the integration as
to come within the proposed order.
Such terms must therefore not be rejected, and we
shall proceed to examine by what means they may be
recognised.
28. Suppose then that after an approximation to a certain
order, the substitutions for the next steps have brought the
equation in u to the form
where the coefficient G is one order beyond that which wo
intend to retain. The solution of this equation will be of
the form
w=......+ G' cos(p0 + #)+......
G' being a constant which may be determined by substi-
tuting this value of u in the differential equation,
-
whence G' =
-
& ;
from which we learn that if p differs very little from 1, G'
will be at least one order lower than #, and will come
within our proposed approximation; and consequently the
term G coa(p0+H) must be retained in the differential
equation.
The equation of the moon's latitude being of the same
form as that of the radius vector, the same remarks apply
to it.
29. If p is small, G' = G very nearly, and the term
G cos(p0-f- H] will not rise in importance in the value of u.30 LUNAR THEORY.
We should therefore be led to reject it in the differential
equation, except for the following reason:
In finding the connexion between the longitude and the
time (one of the principal objects of the Theory), we must
use the equation
Now, substituting for u its value in terms of 0, we shall
find that such a term as G' cos(pO-f- H) in u gives rise to
a term G" coz(p0+II) in this equation, where G' and G'
are of the same order, then
~
=
...... G"Q
whence =
G"
...... Bin(j>0 +J7);
G"
therefore, when p is a small quantity of the first order,
will be one order lower than G", and the term will have
risen in importance by the integration.
T
But yet further, if such terms occur in cy-s , they will be
tit U
twice increased in value
;
for they increase once in forming
I T
\ / r~3 ^5 an(i once again, as above, in finding t.
30. Wehave, therefore, the following rule:
In approximating to any given order to the values of u
and
of s,
we must, in their differential equations, retain periodical
terms ONE ORDER beyond the proposed one^ when the coefficient
in their argument* is near unity.
*The angle of a periodical term is its only variable part and is called
*he argument.TERMS TO BE RETAINED. 31
In approximating to the value of #, we must, in the same
equations, also retain terms ONE ORDER beyond the proposed
one when the coefficient of the argument is near zero; and
T
when such terms occur in
;-, -, they must be retained TWO
fi U
ORDERS beyond the proposed approximation.*
31. We shall here, for convenience of reference, bring
together the equations and the approximate expressions for
the forces:
P T du /d'
* Instead of the forces which really act on the moon, we originally substituted
three equivalent ones. P, T
t Sj these again are, by the preceding expressions,
P
replaced by a set of others. For, we may conceive each of the terms in
p-3, &c.,
to correspond to a force, a component of P, T7
,
or 8] each force having the
same argument as the term to which it corresponds, and therefore going through
its cycle of values in the same time. Now, by Art. (29), when the coefficient of
6 in the argument is near unity, the term becomes important in the radius vector,
and when near zero, in the longitude: hence, a force whose period is nearly tho
same as that of the moon, produces important effects in the radius vector
and a
;
force whose period is very long will be important in its effect on the longitude.
See Airy's Tracts, Planetary Theory, p. 78.32 LUNAR THEORY.
SECTION II.
To solve the Equations to thefirst, order.
32. Neglect all terms depending on the disturbing force,
i.e. those which contain m
'; such teriiis being of the second
order. Art. (25).
The latitude s of the moon can nnver exceed the inclina-
tion of the orbit to the ecliptic;
but this inclination is of the
first order, Art. (22), therefore s is at least of the first order
and s* may be neglected.
wi. p T A A-S A
Whence~
=
2
^;-=
0;-
y- =0,
and the differential equations become
whence u=
p{1 +e cos(0 a)}; or, writing a for~
,
w=a {l+ecos(0-a)}
and s==Asin(^~7)
c, a, i, 7 being the four constants introduced by integration.
33. These results are in perfect agreement with what
rough observations had already taught us concerning the
moon's motion Art. (22); for u-a[\ +ecos(0- a)} repre-
sents motion in an ellipse about the earth as focus.
And s
=k sin (0 7) indicates motion in a plane inclined
to the ecliptic at an angle tan^Ar.
For, if TOM' be the ecliptic,
M the moon's place, MM9
an arc
perpendicular to the ocliptic, thenSOLUTION TO FIKST OUDEK. X]
0; and if TO be taken equal to 7, and OMjoined
by an arc of great circle, we have
tanMM'
=tenMOM'sin OM'
;
or s == tanMOM'
sin (6-
7),
which, compared with the equation above, shews that
Therefore the moon moves in a plane passing through
a fixed point and making a constant angle with the
ecliptic.
The values of a and 7 introduced in the above solutions
are respectively the longtitude of the apse and of the node.
34. What the equations cannot teach us, however, is
the magnitude of the quantities e and k. For this we must
have recourse to observation, and by referring to Art. (22),
we see that e is about ^V and k about T
1
2 ,
that i